 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5094 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
International Journal of Emerging Trends in Science and Technology 
IC Value: 76.89 (Index Copernicus)   Impact Factor: 4.219 DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.18535/ijetst/v4i4.08 
 
A Novel Design and Fabrication of Electromagnetic Internal Combustion 
Engines 
 
Authors 
Abhishek Samanta1*, Ragul G1*, Sreejith C2, Abhijit Roy1, Indira Ghosh1 
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Budge Budge Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India 
2Department of Automobile Engineering, Nehru College of Engineering & Research Centre, Thrissur, India 
*Email: ragulme90@gmail.com, Samanta_avi@yahoo.com 
ABSTRACT  
This paper reports an investigation that was carried out in a magnetic engine is according to the concept 
appears to be a so-called "perpetual motion machine". Here you will find its images, patent, and also you 
will learn information from his production and testing. The Black pointer on the disk indicates the position 
of piston. It is evident that with the closed shutter the piston is located stably in the upper position, and 
shutter renders the valuable screening of magnets, fulfilling the functions described by me. Further, with the 
discovery of shutter piston accomplishes reciprocating motion. The stored energy of flywheel continues to 
move piston to the upper position. Work: the displacements of the shutter = of 0,444 the displacement of 
piston = 1,251. 
Keywords: Magnetic Engines, Lead Acid Battery, IC555 Timers, Time and Control Unit and Pin 
Configuration. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Magnetic engine, in housing of which are placed 
the permanent magnets, the first of which is 
established with the guarantee of a possibility of the 
accomplishment of reciprocating motion under the 
action of the forces of magnetic field, in the 
housing is also established the shaft, connected 
with the first magnet with the aid of the means, 
which makes it possible to convert the reciprocating 
motion of the first magnet into the rotation of shaft, 
that is characterized by the fact that the second 
magnet is securely fastened on the housing 
opposition first, both magnets are oriented by poles 
counter, magnetic engine is supplied with the 
ferromagnetic screen, made with the guarantee of a 
possibility of its displacement in the clearance 
between the magnets perpendicular to the line of 
forces of magnetic field, ferromagnetic screen is 
supplied with the means, which ensures its 
displacement under the action of the rotation of 
shaft, ferromagnetic screen is also supplied with the 
means, which ensures its recurrent displacement. 
Magnetic 
engine 
on 
position 
1, 
which 
is 
characterized by the fact that the mentioned means, 
which ensures the reciprocating displacement of 
magnet, is executed in the form of crank gear. 
Magnetic engine on position 1 or position 2, which 
is characterized by the fact that the mentioned 
means of the displacement of ferromagnetic screen 
contains the rotating lever interacting with the 
ferromagnetic screen and the cam gear, whose 
kulachek is fixed on the shaft, and the pusher, 
which interacts with the fist, is fixed in line with 
rotating lever.  
Magnetic engine on any of pp. 1-3, that is 
characterized by the fact that the shaft is supplied 
with the storage battery of mechanical energy, 
made, for example, in the form of flywheel. 
The aim is to design and develop a control system 
based on electro-magnetic system of an intelligent 
controlled automotive engine system. Based on this 
model, control strategies such as an 'antilock 
braking 
system' 
(ABS) 
and 
improved 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5095 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
maneuverability via individual wheel braking are to 
be developed and evaluated. 
 
2. ENGINE AND ITS OPERATION 
A. Construction 
In this research we use SPARK IGNITION engine 
of the type two stroke single cylinder of Cubic 
capacity 75 cc.  Engine has a piston that moves up 
and down in cylinder.  A cylinder is a long round 
air pocket somewhat like a tin can with a bottom 
cut out.  Cylinder has a piston which is slightly 
smaller in size than the cylinder the piston is a 
metal plug that slides up and down in the cylinder 
Bore diameter and stroke length of the engine are 
50mm and 49mm respectively. 
 
Figure 1: Design of Electromagnetic Engine 
 
 
Figure 2: Fabrication of Electromagnetic Engine 
 
B. I.C Engine 
Internal combustion engines are those heat engines 
that burn their fuel inside the engine cylinder. In 
internal combustion engine the chemical energy 
stored in their operation. The heat energy is 
converted in to mechanical energy by the expansion 
of gases against the piston attached to the 
crankshaft that can rotate. 
C. Petrol Engine 
The engine which gives power to propel the 
automobile vehicle is a petrol burning internal 
combustion engine. Petrol is a liquid fuel and is 
called by the name gasoline in America. 
The ability of petrol to furnish power rests on the 
two basic principles: 
 Burning 
or 
combustions 
always 
accomplished by the production of heat. 
 When a gas is heated, it expands. If the 
volume remains constant, the pressure rises 
according to Charlie’s law. 
C. Working 
There are only two strokes involved namely the 
compression stroke and the power stroke; they are 
usually called as upward stroke and downward 
stroke respectively. 
D. Upward Stroke 
 
During this stroke, the piston moves from bottom 
dead center to top dead center, compressing the 
charge-air petrol mixture in combustion chamber of 
the cylinder. At the time the inlet port is uncovered 
and the exhaust, transfer ports are covered. The 
compressed charge is ignited in the combustion 
chamber by a spark given by spark plug. 
E. Downward Stroke 
The charge is ignited the hot gases compress the 
piston moves downwards, during this stroke the 
inlet port is covered by the piston and the new 
charge is compressed in the crankcase, further 
downward movement of the piston uncovers first 
exhaust port and then transfer port and hence the 
exhaust starts through the exhaust port. As soon as 
the transfer port open the charge through it is forced 
in to the cylinder, the cycle is then repeated. 
F. Nomenclature 
Bore 
This is the diameter of the engine cylinder. 
 
 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5096 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
G. Stroke 
Distance traveled by the piston in moving from 
TDC to the BDC is called stroke. 
H. Engine Capacity 
This is a total piston displacement or the swept 
volume of all the cylinders. 
I. Power 
It is the work done in a given period of time. 
J. Compression Ratio 
It is a ratio of volume when the piston is at the 
bottom dead center to the volume when the piston 
is at top dead center. 
Compression ratio = Maximum cylinder volume / 
Minimum cylinder volume. 
K. Indicated Power 
The power developed within the engine cylinders is 
called indicated power.  This is calculated from the 
area of the engine indicator diagram.  It is usually 
expressed in kilowatts (kW). 
                I.P = B.P + F.P 
F.P is calculated from graph by negative horse 
power method. 
L. Brake Power 
This is the actual power delivered at the crankshaft.  
It is obtained by deducting various power losses in 
the engine from the indicated power.  It is measured 
with a dynamometer and is expressed in kilowatts 
(kW).  It is always less than the indicated power, 
due to frictional and pumping losses in the 
cylinders and the reciprocating mechanism. 
B.P = V * I / 1000 * EFFICIENCY OF 
ALTERNATOR 
M. Engine Torque 
It is the force of rotation acting about the crankshaft 
axis at any given instant of time. 
T = 2* 3.14 * N / 60 
N. Function 
The spark ignition engine uses a highly volatile 
fuel, which easily vaporizes.  The fuel is mixed 
with air before it enters the engine cylinders in the 
carburetor.  This mixture then enters the cylinders 
and is compressed.  Next an electric spark is 
produced by ignition system ignites the compressed 
air fuel mixture. 
 
3. Components and Description 
The Electro-magnetic engine consists of the 
following components to fulfill the requirements of 
complete operation of the machine. 
1) BATTERY 
2) FRAME STAND   
3.1 Battery 
3.1.1 Introduction 
In isolated systems away from the grid, batteries are 
used for storage of electrical energy in the form of 
chemical energy. 
 The only exceptions are isolated sunshine load 
such as irrigation pumps or drinking water supplies 
for storage.  In fact for small units with output less 
than one kilowatt.  Batteries seem to be the only 
technically and economically available storage 
means.  Since both the photo-voltaic system and 
batteries are high in capital costs.  It is necessary 
that the overall system be optimized with respect to 
available energy and local demand pattern.  To be 
economically attractive the storage of solar 
electricity requires a battery with a particular 
combination of properties: 
(1) 
Low cost 
(2) 
Long life 
(3) 
High reliability 
(4) 
High overall efficiency 
(5) 
Low discharge 
(6) 
Minimum maintenance 
             (7)       Ampere hour efficiency 
             (8)       Watt hour efficiency 
We use lead acid battery for storing the electrical 
energy from the solar panel for lighting the street 
and so about the lead acid cells are explained 
below. 
4. Lead-acid wet Cell 
Where high values of load current are necessary, 
the lead-acid cell is the type most commonly used.  
The electrolyte is a dilute solution of sulfuric acid 
(H₂SO₄).  In the application of battery power to 
start the engine in an auto mobile, for example, the 
load current to the starter motor is typically 200A to 
400A.  One cell has a nominal output of 2.0V, but 
lead-acid cells are often used in a series combin-
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5097 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
ation of three for a 6-V battery and six for a 12-V 
battery. 
The lead acid cell type is a secondary cell or 
storage cell, which can be recharged.  The charge 
and discharge cycle can be repeated many times to 
restore the output voltage, as long as the cell is in 
good physical condition. However, heat with 
excessive charge and discharge currents shortens 
the useful life to about 3 to 5 years for an 
automobile battery.  Of the different types of 
secondary cells, the lead-acid type has the highest 
output voltage, which allows fewer cells for a 
specified battery voltage. 
 
Figure 3: Lead Acid wet Battery 
 
5. CONSTRUCTION 
Inside a lead-acid battery, the positive and negative 
electrodes consist of a group of plates welded to a 
connecting strap.  The plates are immersed in the 
electrolyte, consisting of 8 parts of water to 3 parts 
of concentrated sulfuric acid.  Each plate is a grid 
or framework, made of a lead-antimony alloy.  This 
construction enables the active material, which is 
lead oxide, to be pasted into the grid.  In 
manufacture of the cell, a forming charge produces 
the positive and negative electrodes.  In the forming 
process, the active material in the positive plate is 
changed to lead peroxide (pbo₂).  The negative 
electrode is spongy lead (pb). Automobile batteries 
are usually shipped dry from the manufacturer.  The 
electrolyte is put in at the time of installation, and 
then the battery is charged to from the plates.  
With maintenance-free batteries, little or no water 
need be added in normal service.  Some types are 
sealed, except for a pressure vent, without provision 
for adding water. 
The construction parts of battery are shown in 
Figure 3. 
5.1 Chemical Reaction 
Sulfuric acid is a combination of hydrogen and 
sulfate ions.  When the cell discharges, lead 
peroxide from the positive electrode combines with 
hydrogen ions to form water and with sulfate ions 
to form lead sulfate. Combining lead on the 
negative plate with sulfate ions also produces he 
sulfate.  Therefore, the net result of discharge is to 
produce more water, which dilutes the electrolyte, 
and to form lead sulfate on the plates. 
As the discharge continues, the sulfate fills the 
pores of the grids, retarding circulation of acid in 
the active material.  Lead sulfate is the powder 
often seen on the outside terminals of old batteries.  
When the combination of weak electrolyte and 
sulfating on the plate lowers the output of the 
battery, charging is necessary. On charge, the 
external D.C. source reverses the current in the 
battery.  The reversed direction of ions flows in the 
electrolyte result in a reversal of the chemical 
reactions.  
Now the lead sulfates on the positive plate reactive 
with the water and sulfate ions to produce lead 
peroxide and sulfuric acid.  This action re-forms the 
positive plates and makes the electrolyte stronger 
by adding sulfuric acid.   
 
Figure 4: Chemical reaction of Lead Acid wet 
Battery 
 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5098 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
At the same time, charging enables the lead sulfate 
on the negative plate to react with hydrogen ions; 
this also forms sulfuric acid while reforming lead 
on the negative plate to react with hydrogen ions; 
this also forms currents can restore the cell to full 
output, with lead peroxide on the positive plates, 
spongy lead on the negative plate, and the required 
concentration of sulfuric acid in the electrolyte.  
The chemical reaction equation for the lead-acid 
cell is 
Charge. 
Pb + pbO₂ + 2H₂SO₄                 2pbSO₄ + 2H₂O                             
 
 
                                                Discharge 
On discharge, the (Pb) and (pbo₂) combine with the 
(SO₄) ions at the left side of the equation to form 
lead sulphate (pbSO₄) and water (H₂O) at the right 
side of the equation. 
One battery consists of 6 cells, each have an output 
voltage of 2.0V, which are connected in series to 
get a voltage of 12V and the same 12V battery is 
connected in series, to get a 24 V battery.  They are 
placed in the water proof iron casing box. 
5.2 Caring for Lead-acid Batteries 
Always use extreme caution when handling 
batteries and electrolyte. Wear gloves, goggles and 
old clothes.  “Battery acid” will burn skin and eyes 
and destroy cotton and wool clothing. 
The quickest way of ruin lead-acid batteries is to 
discharge them deeply and leave them stand “dead” 
for an extended period of time. When they 
discharge, there is a chemical change in the positive 
plates of the battery.  They change from lead oxide 
when charge out lead sulfate when discharged.  If 
they remain in the lead Sulfate State for a few days, 
some part of the plate dose not returns to lead oxide 
when the battery is recharged. If the battery remains 
discharge longer, a greater amount of the positive 
plate will remain lead sulfate.  The parts of the 
plates that become “sulfate” no longer store energy.  
Batteries that are deeply discharged, and then 
charged partially on a regular basis can fail in less 
than one year. 
Check your batteries on a regular basis to be sure 
they are getting charged.  Use a hydrometer to 
check the specific gravity of your lead acid 
batteries.  If batteries are cycled very deeply and 
then recharged quickly, the specific gravity reading 
will be lower than it should because the electrolyte 
at the top of the battery may not have mixed with 
the “charged” electrolyte.  
 Check the electrolyte level in the wet-cell batteries 
at the least four times a year and top each cell of 
with distilled water. Do not add water to discharged 
batteries.  Electrolyte is absorbed when batteries are 
much discharged.  If you add water at this time, and 
then recharge the battery, electrolyte will overflow 
and make a mess. 
Keep the top of your batteries clean and check that 
cables are tight.  Do not tighten or remove cables 
while charging or discharging.  Any spark around 
batteries can cause a hydrogen explosion inside, 
and ruin one of the cells, and you. On charge, with 
reverse current through the electrolyte, the chemical 
reaction is reversed.  Then the (pb) ions from the 
lead sulfate on the right side of the equation re-form 
the lead and lead peroxide electrodes.  Also the 
(SO₄) ions combine with (H₂) ions from the water 
to produce more sulfuric acid at the left side of the 
equation. 
5.3 Current ratings 
Lead-acid batteries are generally rated in terms of 
how much discharge currents they can supply for a 
specified period of time; the output voltage must be 
maintained above a minimum level, which is 1.5V 
to 1.8V per cell.  A common rating is ampere-hours 
(A.H.) based on a specific discharge time, which is 
often 8 hours. Typical values for automobile 
batteries are 100 A.H to 300 A.H. 
As an example, a 200 A.H battery can supply a load 
current of 200 A.H /8 hour or 25A, used on 8 hour 
discharge.  The battery can supply less current for a 
longer time or more current for a shorter time.  
Automobile batteries may be rated for “cold 
cranking power”, which is related to the job of 
starting the engine. A typical rating is 450A for 
30seconds at a temperature of 0 degree F. 
Note that the ampere-hour unit specifies coulombs 
of charge.  For instance, 200 A.H. corresponds to 
200 A*3600seconds (1hour=3600seconds).  The 
equals 720,000 A.S, or coulombs.  One ampere-
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5099 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
second is equal to one coulomb. Then the charge 
equals 720,000 or 7.2*10^5ºC. To put this much 
charge back into the battery would require 20 hours 
with a charging current of 10A. The ratings for 
lead-acid batteries are given for a temperature range 
of 77 to 80ºF. Higher temperature increase the 
chemical reaction, but operation above 110ºF 
shortens the battery life. 
Low temperatures reduce the current capacity and 
voltage output. The ampere-hour capacity is 
reduced approximately 0.75% for each decreases of 
1º F below normal temperature rating.  At 0ºF the 
available output is only 60 % of the ampere-hour 
battery rating.  
In cold weather, therefore, it is very important to 
have an automobile battery unto full charge.  In 
addition, the electrolyte freezes more easily when 
diluted by water in the discharged condition. 
5.4 Specific Gravity 
Measuring the specific gravity of the electrolyte 
generally checks the state of discharge for a lead-
acid cell.  Specific gravity is a ratio comparing the 
weight of a substance with the weight of a 
substance with the weight of water.  For instance, 
concentrated sulfuric acid is 1.835 times as heavy 
as water for the same volume. Therefore, its 
specific gravity equals 1.835.  The specific gravity 
of water is 1, since it is the reference. In a fully 
charged automotive cell, mixture of sulfuric acid 
and water results in a specific gravity of 1.280 at 
room temperatures of 70ºF to 80ºF. As the cell 
discharges, more water is formed, lowering the 
specific gravity.  When it is down to about 1.150, 
the cell is completely discharged. 
Specific-gravity readings are taken with a battery 
hydrometer, such as one in FIGURE 3.  Note that 
the calibrated float with the specific gravity marks 
will rest higher in an electrolyte of higher specific 
gravity. The decimal point is often omitted for 
convenience.  For example, the value of 1.220 in 
figure (7) is simply read “twelve twenty”.  A 
hydrometer reading of 1260 to 1280 indicates full 
charge, approximately 12.50 are half charge, and 
1150 to 1200 indicates complete discharge. 
The importance of the specific gravity can be seen 
from the fact that the open-circuit voltage of the 
lead-acid cell is approximately equal to 
V 
= 
Specific gravity + 0.84 
 
For the specific gravity of 1.280, the voltage is 
1.280 + 0.84 = 2.12V, as an example.  These values 
are for a fully charged battery. 
5.5 Charging the Lead-Acid Battery 
The requirements are illustrated in figure.  An 
external D.C. voltage source is necessary to 
produce current in one direction.  Also, the 
charging voltage must be more than the battery 
e.m.f.  Approximately 2.5 per cell are enough to 
over the cell e.m.f. so that the charging voltage can 
produce current opposite to the direction of 
discharge current. 
Note that the reversal of current is obtained just by 
connecting the battery (VB) and charging source 
(VG) with positive to positive and negative to 
negative, as shown in FIGURE 3.  The charging 
current is reversed because the battery effectively 
becomes a load resistance for (VG) when it higher 
than (VB).  In this example, the net voltage 
available to produce charging currents is 15V-
12V=3V. 
A commercial charger for automobile batteries is 
essentially a D.C. power supply, rectifying input 
from the AC power line to provide D.C. output for 
charging batteries. Float charging refers to a 
method in which the charger and the battery are 
always connected to each other for supplying 
current to the load.  In figure the charger provides 
current for the load and the current necessary to 
keep the battery fully charged.  The battery here is 
an auxiliary source for D.C. power. 
It may be of interest to note that an automobile 
battery is in a floating-charge circuit.  The battery 
charger is an AC generator or alternator with 
rectifier diodes, driver by a belt from the engine.  
When you start the car, the battery supplies the 
cranking power.  Once the engine is running, the 
alternator charges the battery.  It is not necessary 
for the car to be moving.  A voltage regulator is 
used in this system to maintain the output at 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5100 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
approximately 13V to 15 V. The constant voltage 
of 24V comes from the solar panel controlled by 
the charge controller so for storing this energy we 
need a 24V battery so two 12V battery are 
connected in series. It is a good idea to do an 
equalizing charge when some cells show a variation 
of 0.05specific gravity from each other.  This is a 
long steady overcharge, bringing the battery to a 
gassing or bubbling state.  Do not equalize sealed 
or gel type batteries. 
5.6 Timer and Control Unit 
 
Figure 5: Block Diagram of IC 555 
 
Here the 555 timer IC has been used as a multi 
vibrator. The output of IC 555 is fed to the input 
pin (pin no 14) of CD 4017 continues counting. The 
output of the IC becomes available at pin Nos. 3, 2 
and 4. The output pulse of any one of output pin 
triggers (Puts ON) the Triac and current starts 
flowing across the load connected. This process 
continues on other pins at different time intervals 
and the cycle continues. The frequency interval 
(Time) of the cycle can be adjusted by the pre-set 
look connected to pin 6 of 555 Timer IC. 
5.7 IC 555 Timers 
The IC NE555 timer monolithic circuit is a highly 
stable controller capable of producing accurate time 
delays or oscillations. Additional terminals are 
provided for triggering or resetting if desired. In the 
timing operations, the time is precisely controlled 
by one external resistor and a capacitor, by the 
operation as an oscillator, the free running 
frequency and the duty cycle are both accurately 
contributed with the external RC constants. 
 
6. PIN DIAGRAM 
 
Figure 6: Pin Diagram of IC 555 
 
Figure 7: Circuit Diagram of IC 555 
 
7. PIN CONFIGURATION 
PIN NO: 1 
It is ground terminal. 
PIN NO: 2 
The trigger voltage to the lower comparator is 
applied. It has constant voltage that is at least one 
third of the supply voltage, when trigger voltage 
falls below this level the flip-flop changes its state 
and output becomes high. 
PIN NO: 3 
It is the output terminal, in low state output is equal 
to zero and when at higher state output is equal to 
Vcc. 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5101 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
PIN NO: 4 
It controls the flip flop directly. It turns the device 
to its original position when reset pin is connected 
to ground the output is approximately equal to zero. 
When reset is not used it is connected to Vcc. 
PIN NO: 5 
It is the control voltage terminal. It is connected to 
ground through a capacitor of 0.01 μF. Any 
external voltage at pin: 5 will change both the 
threshold voltage and the trigger voltage reference 
level. 
PIN NO: 6 
Threshold voltage of upper comparator is applied 
from this terminal. The resistor (Rt) connected to 
Vcc and pin: 6 is grounded by an external 
capacitor. The output is high capacitor charges by 
resistor (Rt). When the capacitor changes to the 
threshold level, the output becomes low. 
PIN NO: 7 
It is the discharge pin for external capacitor. 
Usually pin: 7 is connected with pin: 6 directly to 
by a resistor. When the output becomes low then 
the external capacitor discharges by internal 
discharge transistor remains at cut-off and the 
external capacitor charges to Vcc. 
PIN NO: 8 
It is the positive supply terminal. A Dc voltage 
from +5 to + 15 can be applied. 
 
8. Wave forms for IC NE555 Timer  
 
Figure 8: Wave forms for IC NE555 Timer 
 
As we know the IC 555 is available in 8-pin and 
14-pin dual-in-line packages or in a circular to-99 
metal can with eight loads. 
The device consists of two comparators to control 
the transistor. The circuit consists of flip flop and a 
buffered output stage.  The reference voltage for the 
two comparators inside the IC 555 is developed 
across a voltage divider consisting of two equal 
resistors of 5 K ohms each.  The threshold 
comparators is referenced at 1/3 Vcc.  The two 
comparators control the stages of internal transistor 
(T1) is conducting that represent a sort circuit 
across timing capacitors (Cr) the level of the 
terminal is low. 
In most practically circuit the voltage on pin 2 is 
held by above Triggering point by a resistor 
connected to Vcc. 
The negative going trigger pulse is applied to pin 2. 
Potential at this point to fall below ½ Vcc, the 
trigger comparator switches the flip flop cutting of 
(T1) and forcing the output level high to a value 
slightly below Vcc.  Capacitor now starts to charge 
and the voltage across it rises exponentially until it 
reaches the flip flop and the output returns to its 
low state just slightly above ground.  Now 
transistor (T1) is turned ON discharged Capacitor 
so that it can read for its next timing period.  Once 
the triggered the circuit responds to additional 
triggering until the time interval is elapsed. 
The delay periods is 1.1 Re Cr.  The important 
features of IC555 can be summarized as follows. 
1. Timing range from microseconds to hours. 
2. Mono-stable and a stable operation are 
possible through IC555. 
3. The duty cycle can be adjusted according to 
our necessity. 
4. It has the ability to operate from a wide 
range of supply Voltage. 
5. The output of 555 is compatible with 
CMOS, DTL and TTL, logic.  But when 
used with a 5V supply. 
6. Triggering and reset inputs are logically 
compatible. 
7. Output can be operated as normal ON and 
normal OFF. 
8. High temperature stability. 
9. Unlike RC timers, 555 provide a time 
intervals that is virtually independence of 
supply voltage Vcc.  This because that, the 
charge rate of capacitor (Cr) and the 
reference 
voltage 
to 
the 
threshold 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5102 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
comparator are all directly proportional to 
the supply voltage. 
IC 555 SPECIFICATIONS 
Supply Voltage (Vcc)       = 4.5 to 15V 
Supply Current (Vcc=5V/2)   = 3 to 6mA 
Supply Current (Vcc=25V/2) = 10 to 15mA 
Output Current                      = 200mA (maximum) 
Power dissipation 
           = 600mw 
Operating temperature           = 0-70 degree Celsius. 
 
9. MAGNETIC-ENGINES 
A magnetic engine is an engine that runs solely by 
magnetic force, using no fuel, no electricity, no 
other source of power, and emitting no pollution of 
any kind. There are lots of myths about these, much 
centering around the buzzwords "perpetual motion” 
that tends to make people shy away from the idea 
that we can get  
To clear up some of the mythology, a magnetic 
engine isn't something for nothing.  As anyone who 
has handled more than one magnet at a time knows, 
there is a real magnetic force to deal with. Being 
able to use it is much the same as using one to stick 
your child's crayon work to the refrigerator. You 
don't doubt that, and if you have a decent "fridge 
magnet", you are reasonably sure that it won't fall 
off. So having a magnet holding little Jimmy or 
Jennie's art to your refrigerator is not a lot different 
than using that same work to turn a flywheel that in 
turn runs a household fan, or a car or a boat or a 
municipal power generator. It's just a different way 
of using that same energy. You can use compressed 
LPG to shoot a nail, or to blow up a dam, or to run 
a generator at the river to produce electricity for 
your house. Those are all just different ways of 
using the force. Nobody finds anything very 
magical about those. And there is nothing magic 
about using the force of magnetism for turning that 
same generator, or your car's drive shaft. It only 
requires different equipment to translate that force 
from a linear one to a rotary one. That's what my 
magnetic engine is designed to do. 
Also, everyone knows that there have been 
hundreds of outright frauds in the field of magnetic, 
promising vast riches to investors, and leaving the 
scene with broke investors and pockets full of 
money for the frauds. I'm not looking for 
"investors". If you indeed wish to invest, you'll 
have to wait until I have released the first working, 
commercially viable engine. Until then, consider 
sending me a small bit to help develop the thing. 
9.1 Design of Piston 
We know diameter of the piston which is equal to 
50 mm. 
9.2 Thickness of piston 
The thickness of the piston head is calculated from 
flat-plate theory. Where, 
t=D (3/16 x P/f) ½  
Here, 
P-Maximum combustion pressure =100 bar 
F-Permissible stress in tension=34.66 N/mm² 
Piston material is aluminum alloy. 
∴t=0.050 (3/16 x 100/34.66 x 10⁶/10⁵)½ x 1000 
=12 mm 
9.3 Electromagnetic coil Design 
The inductance of single-layer air-cored cylindrical 
coils can be calculated to a reasonable degree of 
accuracy with the simplified formula 
 
Where Henry [µH] (micro henries) are units of 
inductance, R is the coil radius (measured in inches 
to the center of the conductor), N is the number of 
turns, and L is the length of the coil in inches. In 
case you need to input coil dimensions in mm, you 
can multiply the formula result with 1/25.4. The 
online Coil Inductance Calculator calculates the 
inductance of any coil using this formula. Higher 
accuracy estimates of coil inductance require 
calculations of considerably greater complexity. 
Where 
Turns -2000 windings 
Wire-2 kg, 20swg (standard measurement). 
9.4 Length of the piston 
Length of the piston = 
1.625 x D 
Length of the piston = 
81.25 mm 
9.5 Other parameter 
The distance from the bottom of the piston to the  
Centre of the piston pin 
= 
.5 x D + 1 
 
 
 
=  
.5 x 65 + 1 
 
 
 
= 
33.5 mm 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5103 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
 
Thickness of the piston walls at open ends
 
 
            = 
.5 x t  
 
 
 
= 
.5 x 12 
 
 
 
= 
6 mm 
 
10. WORKING PRINCIPLE 
The working of the magnetic engine greatly 
resembles the working of a two-stroke engine. To 
start, let us begin from the situation, when piston is 
located in the bottom dead center position, the IC 
555 timer circuit gets actuated which in turn 
actuates the electromagnet which is kept above the 
top dead centre which attracts the piston in the 
bottom dead centre to the top dead centre. During 
this process the excess energy is stored in the 
flywheel   
As soon as the piston reaches the top dead centre 
the current flow to the coil of the electromagnet is 
cutoff, the magnet gets demagnetized so the piston 
again moves to the bottom dead centre. 
The kinetic energy of piston begins to accumulate 
by the flywheel of the shaft (it is not depicted on 
the sketches). The piston gains speed. With the 
approximation of piston to bottom dead center the 
IC 555 timer circuit allows the current to flow again 
and the above procedure is repeated. 
Table 3: List of Materials 
S. No 
Parts 
Quantity 
1 
Battery 
3 
2 
Fly wheel 
1 
3 
Engine arrangement 
1 
4 
Connecting rod 
1 
5 
Cam wheel 
1 
6 
Piston &Permanent Magnet 
1 
7 
Stand (frame) 
1 
8 
Electromagnetic coil 
1 
 
Table 3: List of Material Cost 
Sl. 
No 
PARTS 
Quantity 
Amount 
(Rs) 
1 
Battery 
3 
4500 
2 
Fly Wheel 
1 
2000 
3 
Engine block 
1 
3500 
4 
Connecting rod 
1 
1200 
5 
Cam wheel 
1 
1500 
6 
Piston&permanent  
magnet 
1 
1500 
7 
Stand (Frame) 
1 
1000 
8 
Electromagnetic coil 
1 
1250 
10.1 Labour Cost 
Lathe, 
Drilling, 
Welding, 
Grinding, 
Power 
Hacksaw, Gas Cutting:  
 
Cost = 2000.00 
 
 
10.2 Overhead Charges 
The 
overhead 
charges 
are 
arrived 
by 
“Manufacturing cost” 
Manufacturing Cost=Material Cost + Labor cost 
 
 
    =16050.00+2000.00 
 
                 =18050.00 
Overhead Charges =20% of the manufacturing cost  
 
                 =3610.00 
 10.3 Total Cost 
Total cost=Material Cost + Labor cost + Overhead 
Charges 
 
 
= 
16050.00+2000.00+3610.00 
 
 
= 
21660.00 
Total cost for this project=21660.00    
 
11. CONCLUSION 
This research work has provided us an excellent 
opportunity and experience, to use our limited 
knowledge.  We gained a lot of practical knowledge 
regarding, planning, purchasing, assembling and 
machining while doing this project work.  We feel 
that the project work is a good solution to bridge 
the gates between institution and industries. 
We are proud that we have completed the work 
with the limited time successfully.  The DESIGN 
AND FABRICATION OF ELECTRO-MAGNE-
TIC ENGINE is working with satisfactory 
conditions. We are able to understand the 
difficulties in maintaining the tolerances and also 
quality.  We have done to our ability and skill 
making maximum use of available facilities. 
In conclusion remarks of our research work, let us 
add a few more lines about our impression project 
work. Thus we have developed a “DESIGN AND 
FABRICATION 
OF 
ELECTRO-MAGNETIC 
ENGINE” which helps to produce eco friendly 
vehicles. The application of Solenoid electro-
magnetic coil produces smooth operation. By using 
more techniques, they can be modified and 
developed according to the applications. 
 
 
 
Abhishek Samanta et al                                     www.ijetst.in 
Page 5104 
 
IJETST- Vol.||04||Issue||04||Pages 5094-5104||April||ISSN 2348-9480 
2017 
REFERENCES 
1. Ali S. Faris, Saadi K. Al-Naseri, Raed Isse, 
Ali Salim,“Effect of magnetic field of fuel 
consumption and exhaust emissions in two 
stroke engine”, Energy Procedia, Elsevier, 
2012,  Vol 18,pp. 327-338. 
2. S.Mingdong 
et 
al, 
“Study 
ofn 
the 
combustion 
effiency 
of 
magnetized 
petroleum fuels” 1984. Chinese science 
bulletin, Volume 7, Issue 3, pp. 189-197. 
3. P. Govindasamy, S. Dhandapani, “Experi-
mental Investigation of cyclic variation of 
combustion parameters in 
catalytically 
activated and magnetically energized two 
stroke 
SI 
engine” 
2007. 
Journal 
of 
Engineering, Volume 13, Issue 8, pp. 45-59. 
4. F.Silva, “Analysis of a vehicle crankshaft 
failure” 2003. Engineering Failure Analysis, 
Elsevier, Volume 10, Issue 5, pp. 605-616.  
5. A 
P. 
Pisano, 
F. 
Freudenstein, 
“An 
experimental and analytical investigation of 
the dynamic response of a high- speed cam-
follower 
system”.2009. 
Journal 
of 
Mechanics, Transmission, Automatic in 
Design, ASME, Volume 105, Issue 4, pp. 
692-698. 
6. A. Dysm, “Kinematic and Wear patterns of 
cam and finger follower automotive valve 
gear”. 
1980. 
Tribology 
International, 
Elsevier, Volume 13, Issue 3, pp. 121-132. 
7. Ronald J. Pierk, James F. Burkhard, 
“Design and development of a Mechanical 
variable valve automation system”.2000. 
SAE, World congress, Detroit, pp. 1-10.  
8. J. K. Mills, L. Notash, R. G, Fenton, 
“Optimal design and sensitivity analysis of 
flexible 
cam 
mechanisms”.1993. 
Mechanisms 
and 
Machinery 
Elsevier, 
Volume 28, Issue 4, pp. 563-581.  
 
 
