Journal of Atmospheric Pollution, 2017, Vol. 5, No. 2, 40-46 
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/jap/5/2/1 
© Science and Education Publishing 
DOI:10.12691/jap-5-2-1 
 
A Review on the Different Geometries of Combustion 
Chamber in CI Engines on Performance,  
Ignition and Emission 
Alireza Lotfi1, Hassan Ghassemi2,* 
1Department of Marine Engineering, Imam Khomeini Naval University, Nowshahr, Iran 
2Department of Maritime Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran 
*Corresponding author: gasemi@aut.ac.ir 
Abstract  One of the important issues that today are considered by researchers as a research field is the study of 
combustion chamber in a variety of internal combustion engines. Different designs for the diesel engine combustion 
chamber are planned for this purpose. Open combustion chamber or direct injection and combustion chamber 
divided or indirect injection. Open combustion chamber or direct injection, which is widely used in heavy and 
industrial engines, and the combustion chamber divided in small engines with high revolution. The geometry of the 
combustion chamber in diesel engines (combustion ignition) has studied and discussed. 
Keywords: combustion chamber, direct injection, emissions, pollutants, internal combustion engine 
Cite This Article: Alireza Lotfi, and Hassan Ghassemi, “A Review on the Different Geometries of 
Combustion Chamber in CI Engines on Performance, Ignition and Emission.” Journal of Atmospheric Pollution, 
vol. 5, no. 2 (2017): 40-46. doi: 10.12691/jap-5-2-1. 
1. Introduction 
Awareness of increased pollution around the world has 
led researchers to adopt a new strategy to improve the 
emission and efficiency of internal combustion engines, 
especially diesel engines. Therefore, any documentary 
improvements in the fuel mix and air inside the cylinder 
can significantly improve combustion, then improve the 
engine efficiency and reduce the level of emission of 
propellants. For this reason, changes in the combustion 
chamber have been given particular attention by a large 
number of researchers over the past decade. [1] Emissions 
of greenhouse gases and severe NOx emissions led the 
IMO specifically refer to NOx in the revision in Annex VI 
MARPOL, which was implemented for engines installed 
on ships built on or after January 1, 2011. [2] 
From all parts of the engine, the design of the 
combustion chamber (CC) has a significant impact on the 
propagation, emission and impact properties of the engine. 
The design part of the CC includes type of CC wall 
material, valve position, different air volume in different 
parts of the CC such as the piston bowl, the distance 
between the cylinder head and the piston, slope of valve 
and other. Research in the field of CC has been carried out 
over the past five decades and the compression ratio of CC 
to 14 to 24: 1 is the result of natural breathing of engines 
[3]. In general, the movement of air in the cylinder of 
diesel engines is accompanied by rotation, crushing and 
turbulence, which has a major impact on the air-fuel 
mixing, and combustion operation. Generally, the production 
of air rotary motion is due to the good design of the 
suction valve. The good design of the suction valve makes 
the higher rotation and helps to improve combustion. 
Also, along with air movement, fuel spray features such 
as injection hole diameter, injection pressure, spray angle, 
and spraying time have a significant effect on the 
combustion of a diesel engine. [4]. Whatever, the sprayed 
jet fuel combustion fuel has more time to penetrate into 
the combustion chamber, the more air can be sprayed into 
the jet, much more areas are formed from the air mixture 
with the fuel vapor and the process of mixing with the 
larger pre-mix is more favorable [5]. Since, with the 
design of a suitable combustion chamber, it can achieve 
significant benefits in terms of reducing emissions, without 
having a significant effect on the efficiency of the engine, 
optimizing the combustion chamber shape is the su This 
type of same simulation models are performed for 
managing to predict the effect of combustion chamber 
geometry on the physical and chemical processes 
occurring inside the combustion chamber, without the 
need to use empirical relationships, for example in 
phenomenological models. Deyreisi et al [6,7] in the 
design of the combustion chamber, the piston bowl type, 
have also considered the effect of a variety of geometry of 
the piston bowl on the efficiency and combustion 
parameters, namely, the brake thermal efficiency (BTE), 
the brake specific fuel consumption (BSFC), exhaust gas 
temperature (EGT), Heat release rate (HRR) and the 
pressure and emission of pollutants [8]. Some studies 
carried out on the effect of combustion engine geometry 
on the CI engine efficiency and exhaust emissions will be 
discussed as follows (Lee et al., 2014). [9]. The numerical 
simulation of the combustion chamber in a hemisphere 
(HCC), shallow depth (SCC) and omega (OCC) was 
41 
Journal of Atmospheric Pollution 
 
 
performed using the KIVA-4 CFD software at a constant 
compression ratio of 18.5. The results showed that the 
SCC and OCC combustion chambers produce higher NOx 
pollutants at low and high engine speeds. The combination 
of spray and improved geometry of the piston bowl had a 
positive effect on emission reduction (Kozus et al., 2015). 
[10] Empirical analysis with single injection and two 
injections strategies in three different piston bowel 
geometries resulted in the results of reducing NOx and the 
release of soot with low and partial loading conditions in 
the double-acting injection strategy. Jaichandar et al. [11] 
studied the effect of spraying time and geometry of the 
bowl with two different configurations. They showed that 
the brake thermal efficiency has increased by 5.64%, 
while when the TCC geometry (toroidal combustion chamber) 
was used instead of the HCC (hemisphere combustion 
chamber), the the brake specific fuel consumption was 
reduced by 4.6%. Kun Lin Tay et al [12] investigated the 
combustion properties in a direct injection compression 
engine (DICI) with a combination of kerosene and diesel 
fuel, using different geometries of the piston bowl along 
with different injection rates. In total, three geometries of 
the combustion bowl, namely the Omega Combustion 
chamber (OCC), shallow depth combustion chamber (SCC), 
and shallow depth Re-entrant combustion chamber (SRCC), 
along with six different ramps, gasoline + kerosene injection 
rates, gasoline injection rates and pure kerosene were used. 
They observed that SRCC geometry with the shortest throat 
length has the highest turbulence kinetic energy (TKE). 
Rakopoulos et al [13] conducted an experimental study 
to evaluate the the combustion efficiency and the 
characteristics of the exhaust gases emission. They tested 
diesel fuel mixture with 8%, 16% and 24% of the ethylene 
ether (DEE) volume in the combustion chamber of the 
four-stroke, single cylinder diesel engine, high-speed 
injection Direct (HSDI). The engine worked with different 
three loads, therefore fuel consumption, exhaust emissions 
and gases emissions such as nitrogen oxide, carbon 
monoxide and leak hydrocarbons was measured. 
Nagarsheth and Gossay [14] used two different types of 
TBC combustion chambers TBC to analyze the diesel 
cycle, their diesel motor was made using TBC ceramic 
materials. The concept of an adiabatic engine was used to 
save energy loss and also to reduce emissions of exhaust 
gases. The self-regulated diesel combustion chamber 
components, such as upper surface of piston, engine head 
cylinder, valves and liners, were completely coated with 
two better materials such as TBC materials such as 
MgZrO3 and YSZ, in both cases, the TBC NiCAlY 
coating band was used for better mechanical strength. The 
analysis of diesel combustion periods was carried out and 
various combustion results, such as cylinder pressure, 
mass fraction, heat emission and pressure diagrams were 
given. Yousefi et al. [15] has compared combustion used 
and exhaust emissions for the same ratio for two HCCI 
engines with and without the primary combustion 
chamber. The results of the HCCI engine combustion 
were shown. The HCCI engine, with its initial combustion 
chamber (MK.V comet), tolerated the wrong process, 
while the HCCI engine without an initial combustion 
chamber (modified chamber) experienced a complete 
combustion. The HCCI engine was more advanced with 
higher combustion chamber, heat release rate (HRR), as 
well as had higher the start of combustion (SOC) and 
indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP) compared to 
another motor. Wei et al. [16] in order to better utilize the 
air in the combustion chamber and improve the quality of 
the mixture of fuel and air, has been proposed increased 
combustion efficiency and reduced emissions, a new 
rotary combustion chamber system in DI engines (direct 
injection). The spray was simulated inside the cylinder 
and examined at different angles of the injector nozzle 
with AVL-FIRE code. 
As it is known, the combustion chamber geometry 
plays an important role in the combustion, efficiency and 
diffusion of CI engines. The combustion chamber geometry 
provides the conditions for an appropriate mixture of air 
and fuel before combustion. Typically combustion chambers, 
in addition to the upper space of TDC cylinder, located on 
the piston crown (Piston bowl) and cylinder head (primary 
combustion chamber) are designed in a variety of ways. In 
general, the purpose of this study is to review the 
geometries in the combustion chamber in order to determine 
the suitability of pure and combustible fuel types and its 
effect on combustion, efficiency and emissions. 
2. Combustion Chamber 
Depending on the speed of the engine, the geometry of 
the combustion chamber will change. For low-speed 
engines (less than 1500 rpm) and medium speed (1500-
3000 rpm), the direct ignition chamber is used and for 
high-speed engines (above 3000 rpm), an indirect 
combustion chamber is used. 
The design of the combustion chamber has two 
philosophies: first, the design with the high air velocity, 
second, with the low air velocity in the cylinder. In the 
rotational design of the first case, there are fewer holes in 
the engine and deep piston bowl, while in the second case 
there are more holes in the injector and the small bowl 
piston. However, the entire volume of CC is inside the 
main cylinder and direct fuel is injected into this volume. 
Some of the common geometries used are described below: 
3. Different Geometries of the 
Combustion Chamber 
Square combustion chamber: When using the square 
bowl combustion chamber of Figure 1, it is designed on 
the piston crown. The air movement in the square bowl 
leads to rotate and during compression creates a turbulent 
environment, especially in corner areas. 
Hemi-spherical combustion chamber: Their name 
represents the concept of a combustion chamber at the 
cylinder head or at the top of the piston. Figure 2 shows 
space which is close to half the butter (hemi + -sphere +  
-aic), although in practice it is generally less than half of 
that. HCC combustion chamber of the cylinder head was 
used in 1901. [18] In this combustion chamber, the depth 
to diameter ratio can be different, but this does not apply 
to the proper use of biodiesel fuel as a suitable combustion 
fuel. Therefore, BSFC increases and BTE decreases when 
working with biodiesel in this type of combustion 
chamber. 
 
Journal of Atmospheric Pollution 
42 
 
 
Figure 1. Square combustion chambers 
Toroidal combustion chamber: The brittle motion in 
TCC is better than that of another, so the better air flow in 
this combustion chamber causes a more favorable 
combustion. The TCC combustion compartment has a 
cone angle of 150 to 160 degrees as shown in Figure 3. 
Shallow depth CC combustion chamber: This type  
of combustion chamber is used more frequently in  
low-speed diesel engines, they are usually designed with a 
low-depth hole and a large diameter hole on the piston 
crown. The SCC efficiency in a combustion which uses 
biodiesel fuel is relatively better than HCC, as shown in 
Figure 4. 
Cylinder combustion chamber: It has a cylindrical 
hole in the piston crown and can be modified as a cone, 
that is, a short cone with a base angle of 90 degrees. 
(Figure 5). 
Indirect injection combustion chamber: Combustion 
in an indirect combustion chamber is divided into two 
parts: One part in the cylinder head and another one in 
main cylinder. The fuel is injected into the combustion 
chamber section in the cylinder head. The combustion 
chamber geometry is presented in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 2. (a) Hemispheric combustion chambers, (b) Piston crown in cylinder head 
 
Figure 3. Torodial CC combustion chamber 
 
Figure 4. An example of an SCC combustion chamber 
43 
Journal of Atmospheric Pollution 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Two piece piston design – base piston and 4 piston crown 
inserts with squish area of 25%, 30%, 35% and 40% 
Swirl CC combustion chamber: The swirl-combustion 
chamber (Figure 6) is mainly used in small CI engines 
with a cylinder diameter of less than 100 mm. This 
chamber is spherical and the first half of the combustion 
starts from there and the second half in the piston crown. 
Loss of heat from this type of combustion chamber was 
more than direct CC. 
Pre combustion chamber: In this combustion chamber, 
Figure 6b, the primary chamber in the cylinder head and 
the cylinder chamber are connected to a number of holes 
and the fuel is injected by the nozzle at a pressure of less 
than 450 psi. The main compartment (before combustion) 
contains a volume of 40% of the total volume where the 
combustion starts and initially the air enters it and then 
through the holes into the cylinder. This movement creates 
a severe turbidity in the air and leas to better mix with fuel 
and more favorable combustion. 
4. Strategies to Improve Combustion, 
Efficiency and Emission Reduction 
In this section, we review the methods that resolved the 
problems that occurred in the initial start (cold) and the 
release of pollutants and the analysis of the combustion 
engine chambers: 
Multiple injections in cold start: Multiple injection 
strategies with different injection rates were used to 
improve diesel performance. Shooting flame and pressure 
inside combustion chamber showed that the multi-injection 
strategy is better than single injection under cold start 
conditions. The amount of pressure variation inside the 
combustion chamber with the multi-injection strategy is 
almost twice as likely as single-injection cases [23]. 
EGR: With the return of a percentage of the engine's 
exhaust gases to the inlet valves of the cylinders to reduce 
emissions, it was found that the use of EGR above 20 to 
40 percent of the engine output volume reduced the smoke 
mass in the combustion chamber. Increased EGR also 
reduced greenhouse gas emissions. To obtain smoke and 
NOx information at three levels of EGR, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4, 
the result is that using higher EGR values reduces NOX. 
[24] 
Piezoelectric pressure sensor: Pressure inside the 
cylinder is one of the most valuable signals used to detect 
combustion in IC motors. The piezoelectric pressure 
sensor has fast response speed, light weight, small size 
and low sensitivity to environmental conditions. They are 
widely used to measure the cylinder pressure of the engine 
combustion chamber. [25]. Agarwal et al. [26] using a 
piezoelectric pressure sensor, investigated the digital 
signal processing of the cylinder pressure information for 
combustion detection in the combustion chamber of the 
HCCI engine. 
 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of different In-direct injection combustion chambers used. (a) Swirl combustion chamber (b) pre-combustion chamber 
 
Journal of Atmospheric Pollution 
44 
 
5. The Effect of Combustion Chamber 
Geometry on Combustion, 
Performance and Emissions 
In this section, we refer to studies on the effect of 
various CC geometries on the various characteristics of 
the CI engines (combustion, performance and emission 
parameters). 
The impact of the engine piston bowl area on the 
combustion performance of greenhouse gases examined. 
The volume of the piston bowl was different and 25%, 
30%, 35% and 40% of the total area of the piston. The 
tests were performed with a single-cylinder diesel engine 
with a compression ratio of 10: 1 in 1500 rpm with 100% 
open throttle and the results were analyzed. It was 
observed that an increase in the piston bowl above 30% of 
the piston area resulted in instability in the combustion.  
However, a significant increase was observed in the 
brake and brake thermal efficiency power in the ratio of 
equivalence between 0.7 and 0.9 for the piston bowl of 
30%. The HC emission level for the piston bowl was 30%, 
compared with 25%, 35% and 40%, respectively. There 
was a significant increase in NO emission in the piston 
bowl 30% and 25% compared to 35% and 40%. In short, 
the 30% piston bowl improved combustion performance 
and reduced emissions. 
Dinesh Kumar Soni1, Rajesh Gupta. [27] in his article 
examined the effect of combustion chamber process on 
two samples of re-entrant and hemispherical piston bowls to 
improve the combustion process and the amount of greenhouse 
gases emission in different spray angles (120°, 140° and 160°) 
using the AVL FIRE software and trading CFD code, they 
concluded that at the spray angle of 160, the result is better 
than the other spray angles. In the case of NO and Soot 
emission with the spray angle of 120° and 160° respectively 
had the lowest amount as presented in Figure 7. 
Finally, it can be concluded that the re-entrant piston 
geometry is more reliable to reduce NO emissions; in 
addition, it can be used for a mass fraction of soot with a 
160 ° spray angle. Taghavifar et al. [28] changed their 
piston structure by making changes in the combustion 
chamber depth and diameter. First, the bowl spacing from 
the HCP center from D1 to D4 in steps of 0.005 m (D1 = 
0.045 m and D4 = 0.06 m ), In the second case, the radius 
of the bowl ranges from R1 to R4 in steps of 0.001 m (R1 
= 0.0047 m and R4 = 0.0077 m). In the first case, the 
spacing of the bowl from the HCP center from D1 to D4 
in steps of 0.005 m (D1 = 0.045 m and D4 = 0.06 m), in 
the second case, the radius of the bowl from R1 to R4 in 
steps of 0.001 m (R1 = 0.0047 m and R4 = 0.0077 m). 
During all structural changes, four steps were considered. 
It was found that the increase in bowel movement (D1-D4) 
provides better uniformity in the air / fuel mixture, or the 
quality (equivalence ratio) or the quantitative (homogeneity 
ratio) that leads to increased pressure and HRR. However, 
the start of combustion has been postponed. At the end of 
the expansion stage, it will affect the engine performance 
and combustion heat with the delivery of less work. It was 
reported that at 10 degrees TDC at the angle of rotation of 
the crankshaft (CA ATDC) with increasing D in piston 
bowl, temperature and NOx emission will be reduced, it 
was reported that increasing the radius of the bowl is 
effective on the performance of the engine, despite the 
higher oxygen content and air availability with a higher 
bowel radius, it has adverse effects on the performance of 
the engine. This issue was in fact attributed to the lesser 
motion and torsional flow of the air in this model. Due to 
the larger area of the piston bowl associated with the R4 
design, more heat from the piston wall was lost. 
Jaichandar and Annamalai investigated the biodiesel fuel 
features modified with a modified piston bowl without 
changing the engine compression ratio in the diesel engine 
DI [22]. They found in three ways of Torudyl input 
combustion chamber (TRCC) and Shallow depth Re-
entrant Combustion chamber (SRCC) and hemispherical 
combustion chamber (HCC). In TRCC, compared to 
SRCC and HCC, the combustion was better at the 
maximum cylinder pressure due to better fuel mixing. Due 
to better air motion, the combustion delay for TRCC is 
lower than SRCC and HCC. Also, in the study of the 
specific fuel consumption of the BSFC, the specific fuel 
consumption for SCC has obtained (0.271 kg / kWh) and 
HCC, 288.0 kg / kg, TCC above 252.0 kg / kWh. 
Regarding gases emission, they also achieved the following 
results: unstable hydrocarbons emission (UBHC) for 
TRCC and SRCC is reduced compared to the HCC. CO 
emission by the addition of biodiesel POME is 
significantly reduced. CO emission from the TRCC 
engine was lower than two other combustion chambers. 
Emissions of greenhouse gases and NOx for the TRCC 
were higher than the base engine, which EGR system was 
proposed to solve the problem. In the case of the peak 
pressure, the peak pressure variation due to the braking 
power for the modified engine and the standard engine 
with DOME diesel fuel is 20% POME (Figure 8). It can 
be seen that the peak pressure for the 20% POME 
compared to the standard PBDF fuel is a bit low. 
 
Figure 7. Emissions at different spray angle (a) NO mass fraction (b) Soot mass fraction 
45 
Journal of Atmospheric Pollution 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Variations of peak pressures 
Saravanakumar et al. [29] have used the results of an 
empirical study of a single-cylinder CI engine with 
variable displacement compression ratio which B20 
combination as a test fuel (CIME) was mixed with diesel 
fuel, in order to investigations in a hemispherical combustion 
chamber (HCC), also with the change in the HCC piston 
bowl geometry, a modified hemispherical combustion 
chamber (MHCC) was used. It was considered that CIME 
mixed with diesel (B20) caused better combustion and 
emission and under full load conditions, peak pressure 
B20 in MHCC was higher than HCC and diesel in HCC. 
This indicated that MHCC increased the pressure of 4.7% 
compared to diesel in HCC and reduced emissions by 35%, 
13.8% and 34.1% were obtained respectively for CO, HC 
and soot. 
Hu et al. [30] examined a medium-speed marine diesel 
engine with the effects of fuel injector matching and 
combustion chamber geometry on nitrogen oxide (NOx), 
steam and specific fuel oil consumption (SFOC) using a 
parametric study. The study was performed on four 
different engine loads, for example, at 25%, 50%, 75% 
and 100% of the engine's load. The parameters of the 
injection compared with the combustion chamber 
geometry had significant effects on the targets. The 
injection time had the greatest effect on the objectives, 
especially on the NOx emission. Later injections and 
lower rotation of the air reduced NOX emissions. 
6. Conclusions 
In the present study, we investigated different geometries 
of the combustion chamber in the CI engines and the 
effect of pure diesel and combined diesel fuel on 
performance, combustion and emission, and the most 
important results are as follows. 
1. With changes in the combustion chamber geometry, 
and fuel spraying strategies, it is possible to achieve 
favorable conditions such as squish, swirl, tumble, 
and turbulence for combustion, performance and 
emission. 
2.  In the research on the geometry of the combustion 
chamber with the modified piston bowl in the 
MOTD, in three cases, the Toroidal Re-entrant 
Combustion Chamber (TRCC) and the shallow 
depth Re-entrant combustion chamber (SRCC) and 
hemispherical combustion chamber (HCC) in the 
TRCC compared with the SRCC and HCC has a 
maximum cylinder pressure and combustion delay 
for TRCC for TRCC was less than SRCC and HCC. 
Also, the BSFC for TRCC was more favorable. 
They also achieved the following results regarding 
the gases emission: The unstable hydrocarbons 
emissions (UBHC) for TRCC and SRCC is reduced 
compared to HCC. CO emission from the engine 
with TRCC was less than two other Combustion 
Chamber. Greenhouse gas emissions and NOx for 
TRCC was higher than others. EGR system was 
proposed to solve this problem. 
3.  By investigating the various geometries of the 
piston bowl, the TRCC model was more favorable 
for factors such as turbulence, kinetic energy and 
rotation in the compaction stage and the quality of 
air movement in the combustion chamber was 
reduced, respectively, by TRCC> TCC> SCC> 
CCC> HCC >SqCC 
4.  The most common and best software for simulating 
combustion chamber geometry was CFD code, bur 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1.256
2.512
3.768
5.024
Peak pressure (bar)
Brake  power  (kw)
HCC(DISEL)
HCC
SRCC
TRCC
TRCC(DIESEL)
 
Journal of Atmospheric Pollution 
46 
 
AVL FIRE and KIVA-CHEMKIN were used for 
the performance and analysis of combustion. 
5.  The small and large sizes of the piston bowl and the 
fuel sprayer nozzle nozzles for diesel and bio diesel 
have had a disproportionate effect on the combustion, 
the engine performance and emission which was 
determined with the percentages mentioned in the 
studies. 
6. TBC ceramic materials can be used for better 
mechanical resistance in the combustion chamber 
and better results were obtained for different 
dimensions of combustion such as cylinder pressure, 
mass fraction, heat emission and volume and 
pressure diagram. 
References 
[1] 
Abdul Gafoor C.P, Rajesh Gupta, Numerical investigation of 
piston bowl geometry and swirl ratio on emission from diesel 
engines, Energy Conversion and Management, 101(1), 2015,  
pp 541-551. 
[2] 
Pueschel M, Buchholz B, Fink C, Rickert C, Ruschmeyer K. 
Combination of post-injection and cooled EGR at a medium-speed 
diesel engine to comply with IMO Tier III emission limits, Paper 
no. 76. CIMAC, Shanghai, 2013. 
[3] 
Singh V.P., Tiwari K.S., Singh R., Kumar N., Modification in 
combustion chamber geometry of CI engines for suitability of 
biodiesel: A review, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 
79 (2017), pp 1016-1033. 
[4] 
 KarMun Pang, Nikolas Karvounis, Jens Honore Walther, Jesper 
Schramm, Numerical investigation of soot formation and 
oxidation processes under large two-stroke marine diesel engine-
like conditions using integrated CFD-chemical kinetics, Applied 
Energy Volume 169, (1 May 2016). pp 874-887. 
[5] 
Liu Y., Li J., Jin C., Fuel spray and combustion characteristics of 
butanol blends in a constant volume combustion chamber, Energy 
Conversion and Management, 105(15), 2015, pp1059-1069. 
[6] 
DeRisi A, Manieri DF, Laforgia DA. Theoretical investigation on 
the effects of combustion chamber geometry and engine speed on 
soot and NOx emissions. In: Proceedings of ASME 1999 fall 
technical conference, ICE-vol. 33/1; 1999. 
[7] 
DeRisi A, Donateo T, Laforgia D. Optimization of the combustion 
of direct injection diesel engines. SAE Paper no. 2003-01-1064; 
2003. SAE 2003 Transactions Journal of Engines - V112. 
[8] 
Jyothia U.S., K.Vijayakumar Reddy. Experimental study on 
performance, combustion and emissions of diesel engine with re-
entrant combustion chamber of aluminum alloy, Materials Today: 
Proceedings Volume 4, Issue 2, Part A, 2017, pp 1332-1339. 
[9] 
Li J., Yang WM., An H., Maghbouli A., Chou SK. Effects of 
piston bowl geometry on combustion and emission characteristics 
of biodiesel fueled diesel engines, Fuel, 120(15), 2014, pp 66-73. 
[10] Jesús B., José VP., Antonio G. Javier MS. An experimental 
investigation on the influence of piston bowl geometry on RCCI 
performance and emissions in a heavy-duty engine. Energy 
Conversion and Management Volume 103, October 2015,  
pp 1019-1030. 
[11] Jaichandar S, Senthil Kumar P, Annamalai K. Combined effect of 
injection timing and combustion chamber geometry on the 
performance of a biodiesel fueled diesel engine. Energy Volume 
47, Issue 1, November 2012, pp 388-394. 
[12] Kun Lin Tay, Wenming Yang, Feiyang Zhao, Wenbin Yu, Balaji 
Mohan. Numerical investigation on the combined effects of 
varying piston bowl characteristics of a kerosene-diesel fueled 
direct injection compression ignition engine, Energy Conversion 
and Management 136 (2017), pp 1-10. 
[13] Dimitrios C. Rakopoulos, Constantine D. Rakopoulos, Evangelos 
G. Giakoumis, Athanasios M. Dimaratos. Characteristics of 
performance and emissions in high-speed direct injection diesel 
engine fueled with diethyl ether/diesel fuel blends, Energy 43 
(2012), pp 214-224. 
[14] Gosai D.C., Nagarsheth H.J., Diesel engine cycle analysis of two 
different tbc combustion chamber, Procedia Technology 23 
( 2016), pp 504-512. 
[15] Yousefi A., Gharehghani A., Birouk M. Comparison study on 
combustion characteristics and emissions of a homogeneous 
charge compression ignition (HCCI) engine with and without pre-
combustion chamber, Energy Conversion and Management 100 
(2015), pp 232-241. 
[16] Shengli Wei, KunpengJi, XianyinLeng, Feihu Wang, Xin Liu. 
Numerical simulation on effects of spray angle in a swirl chamber 
combustion system of DI (direct injection) diesel engines, Energy 
75 (2014), pp 289-294. 
[17] http://w.w.w.ebady.com/itm/isuzu. 
[18] Curtis Boat & Woodworking Co. 1901 Hemi engine by Truscott 
Launch and Engine Company, St Joeseph, MI. Designed by Hemi 
inventor, Allie Ray Welch, Chelsea Manufacturing Company, 
Chelsea, MI.. CurtisBoat.com. 2009-09-25. URL: 
http://www.curtisboat.com/hemi_prototype.html. Accessed: 2009-
09-25. 
[19] http:// w.w.w.researchgate.com. 
[20] www.sammachinery.com. 
[21] Ravi K., Porpatham E., Effect of piston geometry on performance 
and emission characteristics of an LPG fuelled lean burn SI engine 
at full throttle condition, Applied Thermal Engineering 110 (2017), 
pp 1051-1060. 
[22] Jaichandar S., Annamalai K., Influences of re-entrant combustion 
chamber geometry on the performance of Pongamia biodiesel in a 
DI diesel engine, Energy 44 (2012), pp 633e640. 
[23] Hwang J., Park Y, Kim K., Lee J., Bae C. Improvement of diesel 
combustion with multiple injections at cold condition in a constant 
volume combustion chamber, Fuel 197 (2017), pp 528-540. 
[24] Taghavifar H., Taghavifar H., Mardani A., Mohebbi A. Modeling 
the impact of in-cylinder combustion parameters of DI engines on 
soot and NOx emissions at rated EGR levels using ANN approach, 
Energy Conversion and Management 87 (2014),pp 1-9. 
[25] Lee K., Yoon M., Sunwoo M., A study on pegging methods for 
noisy cylinder pressure signal, Control Engineering Practice, 16 
(2008), pp 922-929. 
[26] Rakesh Kumar Maurya, Dev Datt Pal, Avinash Kumar Agarwal. 
Digital signal processing of cylinder pressure data for combustion 
diagnostics of HCCI engine. 2013. 
[27] Dinesh Kumar Soni, Rajesh Gupta. Numerical analysis of flow 
dynamics for two piston bowl designs at different spray angles, 
Journal of Cleaner Production 149(15), 15 April 2017, pp 723-734. 
[28] HadiTaghavifar, Shahram Khalilarya, Samad Jafarmadar. Engine 
structure modifications effect on the flow behavior, combustion, 
and performance characteristics of DI diesel engine, Energy 
Conversion and Management, 85, September 2014, pp 20-32. 
[29] Ramesh B.R. Bapu, Saravanakumar L., Durga B. Prasad, Effects 
of combustion chamber geometry on combustion characteristics of 
a DI diesel engine fueled with calophylluminophyllum methyl 
ester, Journal of the Energy Institute 90(1), February 2017,  
pp 82-100. 
[30] Nao Hua, Peilin Zhou, Jianguo Yang. Reducing emissions by 
optimizing the fuel injector match with the combustion chamber 
geometry 
for 
a 
marine 
medium-speed 
diesel 
engine, 
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 53, 
June 2017, pp. 1-16. 
 
