International Journal of Advance Research In Science And Engineering           http://www.ijarse.com 
IJARSE, Vol. No.3, Issue No.8, August 2014                                                        ISSN-2319-8354(E) 
 
167 | P a g e  
www.ijarse.com 
 
ANALYSIS OF MINI TRACTOR CRANKSHAFT 
SUBJECT TO DYNAMIC LOADING 
 
Hiren Natvarbhai Makwana1, Dr. Pushpendra Kumar Sharma2 
1M.Tech Scholar, NIIST, Bhopal 
2HOD & Guide, Mechanical department, NIIST, Bhopal (India) 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
The main aim of this research work is to analyzed and validate existing engine crankshaft von misses stress and 
strain and deformation which subjected under dynamic loading. To complete this parameters here in this work 
CATIA a design software is used to prepared model and HYPERMESH is used to meshing and analyzing the 
existing crankshaft.so ultimately this will  used as a tool for analysis and optimization of crankshaft. From that 
dynamic analysis, fatigue life of the crankshaft and dynamic analysis using modal analysis to find total 
deformation and frequency of the crankshaft. While the converting the reciprocating motion into rotary motion 
by the crankshaft, it is subjected to cyclic compressive and tensile loading in vertical direction as well as with 
some amount of vibratory motion. The study to be carried out to check the load carrying capacity of the crank 
shaft subjected to both vibration and rotation. This dynamic analysis is conducted on the forged steel 
crankshaft, single cylinder four stroke engines of mini tractor which is used in agriculture activities.  
Keywords: Dynamic Analysis, FEA, Crankshaft, CATIA, HYPERMESH 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Now a day’s maximum affiance, minimum production cost and fine work is major important phenomenon in 
automobile industries. Vast products like connecting rod, crankshaft, and engine block are wide researchable 
parts of automobile field. Crank shaft is a major effectible and also complex geometry in the engine, which 
converts the reciprocating displacement of the piston to a rotary motion with a four bar link mechanism. The 
Shaft parts which revolve in the main bearings, the crank pins to which the big end of the connecting rod are 
connected, the crank arms or webs which connect the crank pins and shaft parts. In addition, the linear 
displacement of an engine is not smooth; as the displacement is caused by the combustion chamber therefore the 
displacement has sudden shocks. 
The concept of using crankshaft is to change these sudden displacements to as smooth rotary output, which is 
the input to many devices such as generators, pumps and compressors. It should also be stated that the use of a 
flywheel helps in smoothing the shocks. Crankshaft experiences large forces from gas combustion. This force is 
International Journal of Advance Research In Science And Engineering           http://www.ijarse.com 
IJARSE, Vol. No.3, Issue No.8, August 2014                                                        ISSN-2319-8354(E) 
 
168 | P a g e  
www.ijarse.com 
 
applied to the top of the piston and since the connecting rod connects the piston to the crank shaft, the force will 
be transmitted to the crankshaft.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1. Engine Inside Block Diagram 
The magnitude of the forces depends on many factors which consist of crank radius, connecting rod dimensions, 
and weight of the connecting rod, piston, piston rings, and pin. Due to combustion gas force and inertia force 
there act mainly two type of forces on crankshaft via connecting rod is torsional load and bending load. A 
material of crankshaft must be strong enough to sustain the downward force of the power stroke without 
excessive bending so the reliability and life of the internal combustion engine depend on the strength of the 
crankshaft largely. The crank pin is like a built in beam with a distributed load along its length that varies with 
crank positions. Each web is like a cantilever beam subjected to bending and twisting. 1. Bending moment 
which causes tensile and compressive stresses. 2. Twisting moment causes shear stress. There are many sources 
of failure in the engine one of the most common crankshaft failure is fatigue at the fillet areas due to the bending 
load causes by the combustion. The moment of combustion the load from the piston is transmitted to the 
crankpin, causing a large bending moment on the entire geometry of the crankshaft. At the root of the fillet areas 
stress concentrations exist and these high stress range locations are the points where cyclic loads could cause 
fatigue crank initiation leading to fracture. For this experimental work all the theoretical equations and some of 
the assumption and some fundamental design data arereferd form machine design book by R.S.Kurmi. [6] 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
R. J. Deshbhratar, and Y.R Supple. [1] have been analyzed 4- cylinder crankshaft and model of the crankshaft 
were created by Pro/E Software and then imported to ANSYS software The maximum deformation appears at 
the centre of crankshaft surface. The maximum stress appears at the fillets between the crankshaft journal and 
crank cheeks, and near the central point. The edge of main journal is high stress area. The crankshaft 
deformation was mainly bending deformation under the lower frequency. And the maximum deformation was 
located at the link between main bearing journal and crankpin and crank cheeks. So this area prones to appear 
the bending fatigue crack. 
International Journal of Advance Research In Science And Engineering           http://www.ijarse.com 
IJARSE, Vol. No.3, Issue No.8, August 2014                                                        ISSN-2319-8354(E) 
 
169 | P a g e  
www.ijarse.com 
 
K. Thriveni et al [2] was work on analysis of connecting rod and they are concluded from their study is that The 
maximum deformation appears at the centre of the crankpin neck surface. The maximum stress appears at the 
fillet areas between the crankshaft journal and crank cheeks and near the central point journal. The value of von-
misses stresses that comes out from the analysis is far less than material yield stress so our design is safe. 
Jianmeng et al [3] have been work on 480 diesel engine crankshaft block and they found relationship between 
the frequency and the vibration modal is explained by the modal analysis of crankshaft. By using Pro-E and 
Ansys software for modeling and analysis appropriately. They found that results would provide a valuable 
theoretical foundation for the optimization and improvement of engine design. also they concluded from their 
research work is that maximum deformation appears at the center of crankpin neck surface. The maximum stress 
appears at the fillets between the crankshaft journal and crank cheeks, and near the central point. The edge of 
main journal is high stress area. 
S. Bhagya Lakshmi, Sudheer Kumar V, Ch. Nagaraju [4] was work on Dynamic Analysis of Honda Engine 
Crank Shaft and they find out fine result regarding dynamic analysis like Dynamic analysis is used to find out 
the motion of the bodies with represents to applied loads with the time frame of crank angle. The crank angle is 
calculated with respect to seconds as it takes 0.008 sec for each stroke with to revolution. This value re 
calculated by using spread sheet. The results of the analysis indicate the forces diagram of given connections at 
different crank angle. The piston acceleration is calculated to find out the theoretical and experimental results 
values of graph shown in results. 
R.ravi et al [5] work regarding analysis and optimization of connecting rod.desining and modification of any 
other engine parts are ultimately affected on design parameters of crankshaft.inn that experimental work they 
explore weight and cost reduction opportunities for a production forged steel connecting rod. This has entailed 
performing a detailed dynamic load stress analysis of the connecting rod. In the first part of the study, the static 
load analysis and the selection of material and the production method of the connecting rod are considered. 
Then they go for design of connecting rod in “Catia” Then component was imported to the Ansy’s work bench 
and analysis is done. Then the results obtained in Ansy’s are compared with Experimental values. Also they 
found that Dynamic load should be incorporated directly during design and optimization as the design loads, 
rather than using static loads. 
III. MODELING, ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
Methodology of this research work is starting from Modeling of crankshaft and other parts of engine then follow 
by meshing, applying load magnitude and direction and last dynamic analysis and find out results of Von-misses 
stress, strain and total deformation. 
Configuration of engine from which crankshaft design taken 
 
Crank shaft radius 
47.5 mm 
Piston diameter 
0.085m 
International Journal of Advance Research In Science And Engineering           http://www.ijarse.com 
IJARSE, Vol. No.3, Issue No.8, August 2014                                                        ISSN-2319-8354(E) 
 
170 | P a g e  
www.ijarse.com 
 
Mass of the connecting rod 
0.856kg 
Mass of the piston assembly 
0.550 kg 
Connecting rod length 
150mm 
Izz of connecting rod about the center of gravity 
.004 kg-m2 
Distance of C.G .of connecting rod from crank end 
center 
41mm 
Maximum gas pressure 
125 bar 
 
Material for Crankshaft is S53C of which modulas of elasticity is 210 GPA 
 
Yield Strength is 584Mpa and Poisson’s Ratio=0.3 
 
For analysis purpose it will mesh by tetrahedral element by 1mm size so number of elements getting are 353539. 
                                                                      
 
Fg-3 Meshed Geometry of Crankshaft 
 
Fig-2 Model of Crankshaft for Analysis 
Now for analysis of this meshing geometry there are two major approaches for stress calculation: (a) Based on 
entire crank & (b) Based on single throw. 
 
Fig-4 Maximum Bending Load Result  
Fig-5 Maximum Torsional Load Result 
 
International Journal of Advance Research In Science And Engineering           http://www.ijarse.com 
IJARSE, Vol. No.3, Issue No.8, August 2014                                                        ISSN-2319-8354(E) 
 
171 | P a g e  
www.ijarse.com 
 
Run full crank reduced model (dynamic) to calculate main bearing reactions and torques. Model entire crank 
shaft with FEM. Constrain the model at the fly wheel end. Run analysis applying all possible loads (at the pin 
and main bearing locations) (pressure distributed over bearing area) one at a time. Another approach is 
published can be described as follows: Run dynamic analysis on a reduced model. Cut out one throw of the 
crank through the main journal middle cross-sections (detailed FE).Constrain one cross-section and apply the 
forces i.e. bending as well as torsional forces and obtain corresponding stress states. Another approach is to 
constrain the main bearings for all degree of freedom & applying the bending & torsional force at the crankpin 
end. 
 
Fig-6 Maximum Displacement Result 
Result of that analysis on base of stress and displacement phenomenon shows that the crankshaft shows more 
stresses in area of fillet sand in the p in journal oil holes. Section changes in the crank shaft geometry result in 
stress concentrations at inter sections where different sections connect together. Although edges of these 
sections are filleted in order to decrease the stress level, these fillet areas are highly stresses locations over the 
geometry of crank shaft. Therefore stresses were traced over these areas. The maximum Bending stress acting 
on the crank shaft is 330 Mpa by taking both maximum tensional & bending together. Yield strength of the 
material of crank shaft is 584. So by cross verifying a FOS of this object is coming about 1.76.so its safe design 
right now. Show figure 4, 5 and 6 indicates results of bending, torsional and displacement respectively. 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
 
The main target of this research work is upgrade the engine performance in form of breathing capacity by 0.2 
L. The following conclusions can be drawn from the dynamic analysis conducted in this study: 1) Dynamic 
analysis gives more sophisticate results as compare to static analysis.2) the maximum load occurs at the crank 
angle of 360 degrees for this specific engine. At this angle only bending load is applied to the crankshaft.3) 
Torsional force is maximum when crank is at 25ofrom the top dead centre. 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Advance Research In Science And Engineering           http://www.ijarse.com 
IJARSE, Vol. No.3, Issue No.8, August 2014                                                        ISSN-2319-8354(E) 
 
172 | P a g e  
www.ijarse.com 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R.J Deshbhratar, Y.R Suple, “Analysis and optimization of Crankshaft using FEM”, International Journal of 
Modern Engineering Reasearch, vol-2, issue-5, ISSN: 2249-6645, pages: 3086-3088, Sept-Oct 2012.  
[2] K.Thriveni, Dr.Chandraieha  “ Modeling and analysis of crankshaft using ansys” Internation journal of 
computational engineering research, vol-3,issue-5, page-84 May-2013 
[3] Jianmeng, youngqiliu “FEA of 4 cylinder diesel crankshaft”I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 
2011, 5, 22-29 
[4] S. Bhagya Lakshmi, Sudheer Kumar V, Ch. Nagaraju “Dynamic analysis of Honda engine crankshaft” 
International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT), Volume 2, Issue 1, July 2012 
[5] R.Ravi, K.V.P.P.Chandu, B.V Subhramanyam, “Dynamic analysis and optimization of connecting 
rod”IJRMET Vol. 4, Issue Spl - 1, Nov 2013- Apri l 2014 
[6] Machine Desing by R.S.Khurmi pp-1125-1214. 
