                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AT6601 - Automotive Engine 
Components Design          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT I  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  Introduction 
 
The knowledge of materials and their properties is of great 
significance for a design engineer. The machine elements should be 
made of such a material which has properties suitable for the 
conditions of operation. In addition to this, a design engineer must be 
familiar with the effects which the manufacturing processes and heat 
treatment have on the properties of the materials. In this chapter, we 
shall discuss the commonly used engineering 
materials and their properties in Machine Design. 
                     
                       Classification of Engineering Materials 
The engineering materials are mainly classified as : 
 
1. Metals and their alloys, such as iron, steel, 
copper, aluminium, etc. 
 
2. Non-metals, such as glass, rubber, plastic, etc. 
The metals may be further classified as : 
(a) Ferrous metals, and (b) Non-ferrous metals. 
 
The *ferrous metals are those which have the iron as their main 
constituent, such as cast iron, wrought iron and steel. The non-ferrous 
metals are those which have a metal other than iron as their main 
constituent, such as copper, aluminium, brass, tin, zinc, etc 
 
Selection of Materials for Engineering Purposes 
The selection of a proper material, for engineering purposes, is one of 
the most difficult problem for the designer. The best material is one 
which serve the desired objective at the minimum cost. The following 
factors should be considered while selecting the material : 
1. Availability of the materials, 
2. Suitability of the materials for the working 
conditions in service, and 
3. The cost of the materials. 
Mechanical Properties of Metals 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
The mechanical properties of the metals are those which are associated 
with the ability of the 
material to resist mechanical forces and load. These mechanical 
properties of the metal include strength, 
stiffness, elasticity, plasticity, ductility, brittleness, malleability, 
toughness, resilience, creep and 
hardness. We shall now discuss these properties as follows: 
1. Strength. It is the ability of a material to resist the externally 
applied forces without breaking 
or yielding. The internal resistance offered by a part to an externally 
applied force is called *stress. 
2. Stiffness. It is the ability of a material to resist deformation under 
stress. The modulus of 
elasticity is the measure of stiffness. 
3. Elasticity. It is the property of a material to regain its original shape 
after deformation when 
the external forces are removed. This property is desirable for 
materials used in tools and machines. 
It may be noted that steel is more elastic than rubber. 
4. Plasticity. It is property of a material which retains the deformation 
produced under load 
permanently. This property of the material is necessary for forgings, in 
stamping images on coins and 
in ornamental work. 
5. Ductility. It is the property of a material enabling it to be drawn into 
wire with the application 
of a tensile force. A ductile material must be both strong and plastic. 
The ductility is usually 
measured by the terms, percentage elongation and percentage 
reduction in area. The ductile material 
commonly used in engineering practice (in order of diminishing 
ductility) are mild steel, copper, 
aluminium, nickel, zinc, tin and lead. 
6. Brittleness. It is the property of a material opposite to ductility. It is 
the property of breaking 
of a material with little permanent distortion. Brittle materials when 
subjected to tensile loads, snap 
off without giving any sensible elongation. Cast iron is a brittle 
material. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
7. Malleability. It is a special case of ductility which permits materials 
to be rolled or hammered 
into thin sheets. A malleable material should be plastic but it is not 
essential to be so strong. The 
malleable materials commonly used in engineering practice (in order 
of diminishing malleability) are 
lead, soft steel, wrought iron, copper and aluminium. 
8. Toughness. It is the property of a material to resist fracture due to 
high impact loads like hammer blows. The toughness of the material 
decreases when it is heated. It is measured by the amount of energy 
that a unit volume of the material has absorbed after being stressed 
upto the point of fracture. This property is desirable in parts subjected 
to shock and impact loads. 
9. Machinability. It is the property of a material which refers to a 
relative case with which a material can be cut. The machinability of a 
material can be measured in a number of ways such as comparing the 
tool life for cutting different materials or thrust required to remove the 
material at some given rate or the energy required to remove a unit 
volume of the material. It may be noted that brass can be easily 
machined than steel. 
10. Resilience. It is the property of a material to absorb energy and to 
resist shock and impact loads. It is measured by the amount of energy 
absorbed per unit volume within elastic limit. This property is 
essential for spring materials. 
11. Creep. When a part is subjected to a constant stress at high 
temperature for a long period of time, it will undergo a slow and 
permanent deformation called creep. This property is considered in 
designing internal combustion engines, boilers and turbines. 
 
Completely Reversed or Cyclic Stresses 
Consider a rotating beam of circular cross-section and carrying a load 
W,  This load induces stresses in the beam which are cyclic in nature. 
A little consideration will show that the upper fibres of the beam (i.e. 
at point A) are under compressive stress and the lower fibres (i.e. at 
point B) are under tensile stress. After half a revolution, the point B 
occupies the position of 
point A and the point A occupies the position of point B. 
Thus the point B is now under compressive stress and 
the point A under tensile stress. The speed of variation 
of these stresses depends upon the speed of the beam. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
From above we see that for each revolution of the 
beam, the stresses are reversed from compressive to tensile. 
The stresses which vary from one value of compressive to 
the same value of tensile or vice versa, are known as completely 
reversed or cyclic stresses. 
Notes: 1. The stresses which vary from a minimum value to a 
maximum value of the same nature, (i.e. tensile or 
compressive) are called fluctuating stresses. 
2. The stresses which vary from zero to a certain maximum value are 
called repeated stresses. 
3. The stresses which vary from a minimum value to a maximum 
value of the opposite nature (i.e. from a 
certain minimum compressive to a certain maximum tensile or from a 
minimum tensile to a maximum compressive) 
are called alternating stresses. 
 Fatigue and Endurance Limit 
It has been found experimentally that when a material is subjected to 
repeated stresses, it fails at 
stresses below the yield point stresses. Such type of failure of a 
material is known as fatigue. The 
failure is caused by means of a progressive crack formation which are 
usually fine and of microscopic 
size. The failure may occur even without any prior indication. The 
fatigue of material is effected by 
the size of the component, relative magnitude of static and fluctuating 
loads and the number of load 
reversals. 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Effect of Loading on Endurance Limit—Load Factor 
The endurance limit (e) of a material as determined by the rotating 
beam method is for 
reversed bending load. There are many machine members which are 
subjected to loads other than 
reversed bending loads. Thus the endurance limit will 
also be different for different types of loading. The 
endurance limit depending upon the type of loading may 
be modified as discussed below: 
 
Let Kb = Load correction factor for the 
reversed or rotating bending load. 
Its value is usually taken as unity. 
Ka = Load correction factor for the 
reversed axial load. Its value may 
be taken as 0.8. 
Ks = Load correction factor for the 
reversed torsional or shear load. Its 
value may be taken as 0.55 for 
ductile materials and 0.8 for brittle 
materials. 
Endurance limit for reversed bending load, eb = e.Kb = e ...( 
QKb = 1) Endurance limit for reversed axial load, ea = e.Ka 
and endurance limit for reversed torsional or shear load, e = e.Ks 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 Effect of Surface Finish on Endurance Limit—Surface 
Finish Factor 
When a machine member is subjected to variable loads, the endurance 
limit of the material for 
that member depends upon the surface conditions. Fig. 6.3 shows the 
values of surface finish factor 
for the various surface conditions and ultimate tensile strength. 
 
 
Important Terms used in Limit System 
The following terms used in limit system 
(or interchangeable system) are important from 
the subject point of view: 
1. Nominal size. It is the size of a part 
specified in the drawing as a matter of convenience. 
2. Basic size. It is the size of a part to which 
all limits of variation (i.e. tolerances) are applied 
to arrive at final dimensioning of the mating parts. 
The nominal or basic size of a part is often the 
same. 
3. Actual size. It is the actual measured 
dimension of the part. The difference between the basic size and the 
actual size should not exceed a 
certain limit, otherwise it will interfere with the interchangeability of 
the mating parts. 
4. Limits of sizes. There are two extreme permissible sizes for a 
dimension of the part as 
shown in Fig. 3.1. The largest permissible size for a dimension of the 
part is called upper or high or 
maximum limit, whereas the smallest size of the part is known as 
lower or minimum limit. 
5. Allowance. It is the difference between the basic dimensions of the 
mating parts. The 
allowance may be positive or negative. When the shaft size is less than 
the hole size, then the allowance 
is positive and when the shaft size is greater than the hole size, then 
the allowance is negative. 
6. Tolerance. It is the difference between the upper limit and lower 
limit of a dimension. In 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
other words, it is the maximum permissible variation in a dimension. 
The tolerance may be unilateral 
or bilateral. When all the tolerance is allowed on one side of the 
nominal size, e.g. 0.000 
20– 0.004 
, then it 
is said to be unilateral system of tolerance. The unilateral system is 
mostly used in industries as it 
permits changing the tolerance value while still retaining the same 
allowance or type of fit. 
When the tolerance is allowed on both sides of the nominal size, e.g. 
0.002 
20– 0.002 
, then it is said to 
be bilateral system of tolerance. In this case + 0.002 is the upper limit 
and – 0.002 is the lower limit. 
The method of assigning unilateral and bilateral tolerance is shown in 
Fig. 3.2 (a) and 
(b) respectively. 
7. Tolerance zone. It is the zone between the maximum and minimum 
limit size, as shown in 
Fig. 3.3. 
Fig. 3.3. Tolerance zone. 
8. Zero line. It is a straight line corresponding to the basic size. The 
deviations are measured 
from this line. The positive and negative deviations are shown above 
and below the zero line 
respectively. 
9. Upper deviation. It is the algebraic difference between the 
maximum size and the basic size. 
The upper deviation of a hole is represented by a symbol ES (Ecart 
Superior) and of a shaft, it is 
represented by es. 
10. Lower deviation. It is the algebraic difference between the 
minimum size and the basic size. 
The lower deviation of a hole is represented by a symbol EI (Ecart 
Inferior) and of a shaft, it is 
represented by ei. 
11. Actual deviation. It is the algebraic difference between an actual 
size and the corresponding 
basic size. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
12. Mean deviation. It is the arithmetical mean between the upper and 
lower deviations. 
13. Fundamental deviation. It is one of the two deviations which is 
conventionally chosen to 
define the position of the tolerance zone in relation to zero line, as 
shown in fig 
 
 
Fits 
The degree of tightness or looseness between the two mating parts is 
known as a fit of the parts. 
The nature of fit is characterised by the presence and size of clearance 
and interference. 
The clearance is the amount by which the actual size of the shaft is 
less than the actual size of 
the mating hole in an assembly as shown in Fig. 3.5 (a). In other 
words, the clearance is the difference 
between the sizes of the hole and the shaft before assembly. The 
difference must be positive. 
 Types of fits. 
The interference is the amount by which the actual size of a shaft is 
larger than the actual 
finished size of the mating hole in an assembly as shown in Fig. 3.5 
(b). In other words, the interference 
is the arithmetical difference between the sizes of the hole and the 
shaft, before assembly. The difference 
must be negative. 
 Types of Fits 
According to Indian standards, the fits are classified into the following 
three groups : 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
1. Clearance fit. In this type of fit, the size limits for mating parts are 
so selected that clearance 
between them always occur, as shown in Fig. 3.5 (a). It may be noted 
that in a clearance fit, the 
tolerance zone of the hole is entirely above the tolerance zone of the 
shaft. 
In a clearance fit, the difference between the minimum size of the hole 
and the maximum size of 
the shaft is known as minimum clearance whereas the difference 
between the maximum size of the 
hole and minimum size of the shaft is called maximum clearance 
 
2. Interference fit. In this type of fit, the size limits for the mating 
parts are so selected that 
interference between them always occur, as shown in Fig. 3.5 (b). It 
may be noted that in an interference 
fit, the tolerance zone of the hole is entirely below the tolerance zone 
of the shaft. 
In an interference fit, the difference between the maximum size of the 
hole and the minimum 
size of the shaft is known as minimum interference, whereas the 
difference between the minimum 
size of the hole and the maximum size of the shaft is called maximum 
interference, as shown in Fig. 
3.5 (b). 
The interference fits may be shrink fit, heavy drive fit and light drive 
fit. 
3. Transition fit. In this type of fit, the size limits for the mating parts 
are so selected that either 
a clearance or interference may occur depending upon the actual size 
of the mating parts, as shown in 
Fig. 3.5 (c). It may be noted that in a transition fit, the tolerance zones 
of hole and shaft overlap. 
The transition fits may be force fit, tight fit and push fit. 
Effect of Surface Finish on Endurance Limit—Surface 
Finish Factor 
When a machine member is subjected to variable loads, the endurance 
limit of the material for 
that member depends upon the surface conditions. Fig. 6.3 shows the 
values of surface finish factor 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
for the various surface conditions and ultimate tensile strength. 
 Surface finish factor for various surface conditions. 
When the surface finish factor is known, then the endurance limit for 
the material of the machine 
member may be obtained by multiplying the endurance limit and the 
surface finish factor. We see that for a mirror polished material, the 
surface finish factor is unity. In other words, the endurance limit for 
mirror polished material is maximum and it goes on reducing due to 
surface condition. 
Let Ksur = Surface finish factor. 
Endurance limit, 
e1 = eb.Ksur= e.Kb.Ksur = e.Ksur ...( Q Kb = 1) 
...(For reversed bending load) 
= ea.Ksur = e.Ka.Ksur ...(For reversed axial load) 
= e.Ksur = e.Ks.Ksur ...(For reversed torsional or shear load) 
Note : The surface finish factor for non-ferrous metals may be taken 
as unity. 
 
 
 
 
Rankine’s Formula for Columns 
We have already discussed that Euler’s formula gives correct results 
only for very long columns. 
Though this formula is applicable for columns, ranging from very long 
to short ones, yet it does not 
give reliable results. Prof. Rankine, after a number of experiments, 
gave the following empirical 
formula for columns 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
A little consideration will show, that the value of WC will remain 
constant irrespective of the 
fact whether the column is a long one or short one. Moreover, in the 
case of short columns, the value 
of WE will be very high, therefore the value of 1 / WE will be quite 
negligible as compared to 1 / WC. 
It is thus obvious, that the Rankine’s formula will give the value of its 
crippling load (i.e. Wcr) 
approximately equal to the ultimate crushing load (i.e. WC ). In case of 
long columns, the value of WE 
will be very small, therefore the value of 1 / WE will be quite 
considerable as compared to 1 / WC. It 
is thus obvious, that the Rankine’s formula will give the value of its 
crippling load (i.e. Wcr) 
approximately equal to the crippling load by Euler’s formula (i.e. WE 
). Thus, we see that Rankine’s 
formula gives a fairly correct result for all cases of columns, ranging 
from short to long columns. 
From equation (i), we know that L = Equivalent length of the column, 
and 
k = Least radius of gyration. 
The following table gives the values of crushing stress and Rankine’s 
constant for various 
materials. 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Johnson’s Formulae for Columns 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT II  
 
DESIGN OF CYLINDER, 
PISTON AND 
CONNECTING ROD 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Principal Parts of an Engine 
 
The principal parts of an I.C engine, as shown in Fig. 32.1 are as follows : 
 
1. Cylinder and cylinder liner, 2. Piston, piston rings and piston pin or gudgeon pin, 3. Connecting rod 
with small and big end bearing, 4. Crank, crankshaft and crank pin, and 5. Valve gear mechanism. 
 
The design of the above mentioned principal parts are discussed, in detail, in the following 
pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.1. Internal combustion engine parts. 
 
32.3 Cylinder and Cylinder Liner 
 
The function of a cylinder is to retain the working fluid and to guide the piston. The cylinders are 
usually made of cast iron or cast steel. Since the cylinder has to withstand high temperature due to the 
combustion of fuel, therefore, some arrangement must be provided to cool the cylinder. The single 
cylinder engines (such as scooters and motorcycles) are generally air cooled. They are provided with 
fins around the cylinder. The multi-cylinder engines (such as of cars) are provided with water jackets 
around the cylinders to cool it. In smaller engines. the cylinder, water jacket and the frame are 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  
made as one piece, but for all the larger engines, these parts are manufactured separately. The 
cylinders are provided with cylinder liners so that in case of wear, they can be easily replaced. The 
cylinder liners are of the following two types : 
 
1. Dry liner, and 2. Wet liner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.2. Dry and wet liner. 
 
A cylinder liner which does not have any direct contact with the engine cooling water, is 
known as dry liner, as shown in Fig. 32.2 (a). A cylinder liner which have its outer surface in 
direct contact with the engine cooling water, is known as wet liner, as shown in Fig. 32.2 (b). 
 
The cylinder liners are made from good quality close grained cast iron (i.e. pearlitic cast 
iron), nickel cast iron, nickel chromium cast iron. In some cases, nickel chromium cast steel with 
molybdenum may be used. The inner surface of the liner should be properly heat-treated in order 
to obtain a hard surface to reduce wear. 
 
Design of a Cylinder 
 
In designing a cylinder for an I. C. engine, it is required to determine the following values : 
 
1. Thickness of the cylinder wall. The cylinder wall is subjected to gas pressure and the 
piston side thrust. The gas pressure produces the following two types of stresses : 
 
(a) Longitudinal stress, and (b) Circumferential stress. 
 
 
 
 
Camshaft controls the 
valves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crankshaft turns the 
piston action into rotation 
 
 
Piston 
 
 
 
Cam 
 
Piston ring seals the piston to 
prevent gases escaping 
 
 
Air intake 
 
 
Valve lets fuel and air in and 
exhaust gases out 
 
Alternator 
 
Belt drives alternator to supply 
electricity to spark plugs. 
 
Dip stick to check oil level 
 
Sump is filled with oil to 
reduce friction 
 
Oil is pumped up into 
cylinders to lubricate pistons 
 
The above picture shows crankshaft, pistons and cylinder of a 4-stroke petrol engine. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since these two stressess act at right angles to each other, therefore, the net stress in each 
direction is reduced. 
 
The piston side thrust tends to bend the cylinder wall, but the stress in the wall due to side thrust 
 
is very small and hence it may be neglected. 
Let 
D
0 = Outside diameter of the cylinder in mm, 
D = Inside diameter of the cylinder in mm, 
p = Maximum pressure inside the engine cylinder in N/mm2, 
t = Thickness of the cylinder wall in mm, and 
1/m = Poisson’s ratio. It is usually taken as 0.25. 
The apparent longitudinal stress is given by 
Force 
π 
 D 
2
  p
D 2 . p 
σ l = 
 4 
Area 
π 
2 −  D
2
( D0 )2 −  D2 
[( D0 ) 
] 
4 
and the apparent circumferential stresss is given by 
σ c  Force 
 D  l   p 
  D   p 
Area 
2t  l 
2t 
... (where l is the length of the cylinder and area is the projected area) 
∴ Net longitudinal stress = σl − σc 
m 
and net circumferential stress = σ c − σl 
m 
The thickness of a cylinder wall (t) is usually obtained by using a thin cylindrical formula,i.e., 
t = 
p   D   C 
2 σ c 
where 
p = Maximum pressure inside the cylinder in N/mm2, 
D = Inside diameter of the cylinder or cylinder bore in mm, 
σc = Permissible circumferential or hoop stress for the cylinder material 
in MPa or N/mm2. Its value may be taken from 35 MPa to 
100 MPa depending upon the size and material of the cylinder. 
 
C = Allowance for reboring. 
 
The allowance for reboring (C ) depending upon the cylinder bore (D) for I. C. engines is 
given in the following table : 
 
Table 32.1. Allowance for reboring for I. C. engine cylinders. 
 
D (mm) 
75 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
450 
500 
C (mm) 
1.5 
2.4 
4.0 
6.3 
8.0 
9.5 
11.0 
12.5 
12.5 
12.5 
 
The thickness of the cylinder wall usually varies from 4.5 mm to 25 mm or more depending 
upon the size of the cylinder. The thickness of the cylinder wall (t) may also be obtained from the 
following empirical relation, i.e. 
 
t = 0.045 D + 1.6 mm 
The other empirical relations are as follows : 
Thickness of the dry liner 
 
= 0.03 D to 0.035 D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
Thickness of the water jacket wall 
 
= 0.032 D + 1.6 mm or t / 3 m for bigger cylinders and 3t /4 for 
smaller cylinders  
 
Water space between the outer cylinder wall and inner jacket wall 
 
= 10 mm for a 75 mm cylinder to 75 mm for a 750 mm 
cylinder or 0.08 D + 6.5 mm  
 
2. Bore and length of the cylinder. The bore (i.e. inner diameter) and length of the cylinder 
may be determined as discussed below :  
Let 
pm  = Indicated mean effective pressure in N/mm2, 
 
D = Cylinder bore in mm, 
 
A = Cross-sectional area of the cylinder in mm2, 
= π D2/4 
l = Length of stroke in metres, 
 
N = Speed of the engine in r.p.m., and 
 
n = Number of working strokes per min 
 
= N, for two stroke engine 
 
= N/2, for four stroke engine. 
 
We know that the power produced inside the engine cylinder, i.e. indicated power, 
 
I.P. 
 p
m  l
  A
  n
 watts 
60 
 
From this expression, the bore (D) and length of stroke (l) is determined. The length of 
stroke is generally taken as 1.25 D to 2D. 
 
Since there is a clearance on both sides of the cylinder, therefore length of the cylinder is 
taken as 15 percent greater than the length of stroke. In other words, 
 
Length of the cylinder, L = 1.15 × Length of stroke = 1.15 l 
 
Notes : (a) If the power developed at the crankshaft, i.e. brake power (B. P.) and the mechanical efficiency 
(ηm) of the engine is known, then 
 
B.P. 
I.P. =  ηm 
(b) The maximum gas pressure ( p ) may be taken as 9 to 10 times the mean effective pressure ( pm). 
 
3. Cylinder flange and studs. The cylinders are cast integral with the upper half of the crank-
case or they are attached to the crankcase by means of a flange with studs or bolts and nuts. The 
cylinder flange is integral with the cylinder and should be made thicker than the cylinder wall. The 
flange thickness should be taken as 1.2 t to 1.4 t, where t is the thickness of cylinder wall. 
 
The diameter of the studs or bolts may be obtained by equating the gas load due to the maximum 
pressure in the cylinder to the resisting force offered by all the studs or bolts. Mathematically, 
 
π 
 
4 
 
where 
 
 D 2 . p = n   
π ( d 
c 
)2 σ 
T 
s 
4 
D = Cylinder bore in mm, 
p = Maximum pressure in N/mm2, 
n
s = Number of studs. It may be taken as 0.01 D + 4 to 0.02 D + 4 
dc = Core or minor diameter, i.e. diameter at the root of the thread in 
mm, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  
σt = Allowable tensile stress for the material of studs or bolts in MPa 
or N/mm2. It may be taken as 35 to 70 MPa. 
The nominal or major diameter of the stud or bolt (d ) usually lies between 0.75 tf to tf, where tf is 
the thickness of flange. In no case, a stud or bolt less than 16 mm diameter should be used. 
 
The distance of the flange from the centre of the hole for the stud or bolt should not be less 
than d + 6 mm and not more than 1.5 d, where d is the nominal diameter of the stud or bolt. 
 
In order to make a leak proof joint, the pitch of the studs or bolts should lie between 19  d  to 
 
28.5 d, where d is in mm.  
 
4. Cylinder head. Usually, a separate cylinder head or cover is provided with most of the 
engines. It is, usually, made of box type section of considerable depth to accommodate ports for 
air and gas passages, inlet valve, exhaust valve and spark plug (in case of petrol engines) or 
atomiser at the centre of the cover (in case of diesel engines).  
 
The cylinder head may be approximately taken as a flat circular plate whose thickness (th) 
may be determined from the following relation : 
t  = D  C
 .
 p 
h 
σc 
where 
D = Cylinder bore in mm, 
 
p = Maximum pressure inside the cylinder in N/mm2, 
σc = Allowable circumferential stress in MPa or N/mm2. It may be 
taken as 30 to 50 MPa, and 
 
C = Constant whose value is taken as 0.1. 
 
The studs or bolts are screwed up tightly alongwith a metal gasket or asbestos packing to provide 
a leak proof joint between the cylinder and cylinder head. The tightness of the joint also depends 
 
upon the pitch of the bolts or studs, which should lie between 19 d to 28.5 d. The pitch circle 
diameter (Dp) is usually taken as D + 3d. The studs or bolts are designed in the same way as 
discussed above. 
 
Example 32.1. A four stroke diesel engine has the following specifications : 
 
Brake power = 5 kW ; Speed = 1200 r.p.m. ; Indicated mean effective pressure = 0.35 N / 
mm 2 ; Mechanical efficiency = 80 %. 
 
Determine : 1. bore and length of the cylinder ; 2. thickness of the cylinder head ; and 3. size 
of studs for the cylinder head. 
 
Ignition 
4-Stroke Petrol Engine 
system 
Inlet 
Spark plug 
Hot gases expand and force 
Terminal 
causes a 
the piston down 
valve   Piston 
spark 
E x h a u s t 
Ceramic 
Crankshaft 
valve 
insulator 
Spark plug 
casing 
Central 
electrode 
Screw 
fitting 
Earth 
electrode 
1. Intake 
2. Compression 
3. Power 
4. Exhaust, 
5. Spark plug 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
Solution. Given: B.P. = 5kW = 5000 W ; N = 1200 r.p.m. or n = N / 2 = 600 ; 
p m = 0.35 N/mm2; η m = 80% = 0.8 
1. Bore and length of cylinder 
Let 
D = Bore of the cylinder in mm, 
A = Cross-sectional area of the cylinder = π 
 D2 mm2 
4 
l = Length of the stroke in m. 
= 1.5 D mm = 1.5 D / 1000 m 
....(Assume)
We know that the indicated power, 
I.P = B.P. / ηm = 5000 / 0.8 = 6250 W 
We also know that the indicated power (I.P.), 
6250 = pm . l . A . n 
0.35  1.5 D  π D2  600
= 4.12 × 10–3 D3 
60 
60  1000  4 
...Q For four stroke engine, n = N/2) 
∴ 
D3  = 6250 / 4.12 × 10–3 = 1517 × 103 or D = 115 mm Ans. 
and 
l = 1.5 D = 1.5 × 115 = 172.5 mm 
 
Taking a clearance on both sides of the cylinder equal to 15% of the stroke, therefore length 
of the cylinder, 
 
L = 1.15 l = 1.15 × 172.5 = 198 say 200 mm Ans.  
 
2. Thickness of the cylinder head  
 
Since the maximum pressure ( p) in the engine cylinder is taken as 9 to 10 times the mean 
effective pressure ( pm), therefore let us take 
p = 9 pm = 9 × 0.35 = 3.15 N/mm2 
We know that thickness of the cyclinder head, 
t = D C .p 
 115 0.1  3.15 = 9.96 say 10 mm Ans. 
42 
h 
σt 
...(Taking C = 0.1 and σt = 42 MPa = 42 N/mm2) 
 
3. Size of studs for the cylinder head 
 
Let 
d = Nominal diameter of the stud in mm, 
 
dc = Core diameter of the stud in mm. It is usually taken as 0.84 d. 
σt = Tensile stress for the material of the stud which is usually nickel 
steel. 
 
ns = Number of studs. 
 
We know that the force acting on the cylinder head (or on the studs) 
 
= π   D 2   p  π (115) 2 3.15  32 702 N 
...(i) 
4 
4 
The number of studs (ns ) are usually taken between 0.01 D + 4 (i.e. 0.01 × 115 + 4 = 5.15) and 
0.02 D + 4 (i.e. 0.02 × 115 + 4 = 6.3). Let us take ns = 6. 
We know that resisting force offered by all the studs 
 
= ns  π (dc )2 σ t 
 6  π (0.84d )2 65  216 d 2 N 
...(ii) 
4 
4 
...(Taking σt = 65 MPa = 65 N/mm2) 
From equations (i) and (ii), 
 
d 2  = 32 702 / 216 = 151 or d = 12.3 say 14 mm 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The pitch circle diameter of the studs (Dp) is taken D + 3d. 
∴ 
Dp  = 115 + 3 × 14 = 157 mm 
We know that pitch of the studs 
= π   Dp 
 π  157 
 82.2 mm 
ns 
6 
 
We know that for a leak-proof joint, the pitch of the studs should lie between 19 d to 28.5 d , 
where d is the nominal diameter of the stud. 
∴ Minimum pitch of the studs 
 
= 19 d = 19 14 = 71.1 mm and 
maximum pitch of the studs 
 
= 28.5  d  28.5 14  106.6mm 
 
Since the pitch of the studs obtained above (i.e. 82.2 mm) lies within 71.1 mm and 106.6 
mm, therefore, size of the stud (d ) calculated above is satisfactory. 
 
 
d = 14 mm Ans. 
 
32.5 Piston 
 
The piston is a disc which reciprocates within a cylinder. It is either moved by the fluid or it 
moves the fluid which enters the cylinder. The main function of the piston of an internal 
combustion engine is to receive the impulse from the expanding gas and to transmit the energy to 
the crankshaft through the connecting rod. The piston must also disperse a large amount of heat 
from the combustion chamber to the cylinder walls. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.3. Piston for I.C. engines (Trunk type). 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
The piston of internal combustion engines are usually of trunk type as shown in Fig. 32.3. 
Such pistons are open at one end and consists of the following parts : 
 
1. Head or crown. The piston head or crown may be flat, convex or concave depending upon 
the design of combustion chamber. It withstands the pressure of gas in the cylinder.  
 
2. Piston rings. The piston rings are used to seal the cyliner in order to prevent leakage of 
the gas past the piston.  
 
3. Skirt. The skirt acts as a bearing for the side thrust of the connecting rod on the walls of 
cylinder.  
 
4. Piston pin. It is also called gudgeon pin or wrist pin. It is used to connect the piston to the 
connecting rod.  
 
32.6 Design Considerations for a Piston  
 
In designing a piston for I.C. engine, the following points should be taken into consideration : 
 
1. It should have enormous strength to withstand the high gas pressure and inertia forces.  
 
2. It should have minimum mass to minimise the inertia forces.  
 
3. It should form an effective gas and oil sealing of the cylinder.  
 
4. It should provide sufficient  bearing area to prevent undue wear. 
 
5. It should disprese the heat of combustion quickly to the cylinder walls.  
 
6. It should have high speed reciprocation without noise.  
 
7. It should be of sufficient rigid construction to withstand thermal and mechanical distortion.  
 
8. It should have sufficient support for the piston pin.  
 
32.7 Material for Pistons  
 
The most commonly used materials for pistons of I.C. engines are cast iron, cast aluminium, 
forged aluminium, cast steel and forged steel. The cast iron pistons are used for moderately rated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spark plug 
 
 
 
 
Carburettor 
Twin-cylinder 
aeroplane engine 
 
Cylinder head 
 
 
Propeller 
2. Side view 
 
1. Front view 
 
Twin cylinder airplane engine of 1930s. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engines with piston speeds below 6 m / s and aluminium alloy pistons are used for highly rated en-
gines running at higher piston sppeds. It may be noted that 
 
1. Since the *coefficient of thermal expansion for aluminium is about 2.5 times that of cast 
iron, therefore, a greater clearance must be provided between the piston and the cylinder wall 
(than with cast iron piston) in order to prevent siezing of the piston when engine runs continuously 
under heavy loads. But if excessive clearance is allowed, then the piston will develop ‘piston slap’ 
while it is cold and this tendency increases with wear. The less clearance between the piston and 
the cylinder wall will lead to siezing of piston.  
 
2. Since the aluminium alloys used for pistons have high **heat conductivity (nearly four 
times that of cast iron), therefore, these pistons ensure high rate of heat transfer and thus keeps 
down the maximum temperature difference between the centre and edges of the piston head or 
crown.  
 
Notes: (a) For a cast iron piston, the temperature at the centre of the piston head (TC) is about 425°C to 450°C 
under full load conditions and the temperature at the edges of the piston head (TE) is about 200°C to 225°C. 
(b) For aluminium alloy pistons, TC is about 260°C to 290°C and TE is about 185°C to 215°C. 
 
3. Since the aluminium alloys are about ***three times lighter than cast iron, therfore, its 
mechanical strength is good at low temperatures, but they lose their strength (about 50%) at 
temperatures above 325°C. Sometimes, the pistons of aluminium alloys are coated with 
aluminium oxide by an electrical method. 
 
32.8 Piston Head or Crown 
 
The piston head or crown is designed keeping in view the following two main considerations, i.e. 
 
1. It should have adequate strength to withstand the straining action due to pressure of 
explosion inside the engine cylinder, and  
 
2. It should dissipate the heat of combustion to the cylinder walls as quickly as possible.  
 
On the basis of first consideration of straining action, the thickness of the piston head is 
determined by treating it as a flat circular plate of uniform thickness, fixed at the outer edges and 
subjected to a uniformly distributed load due to the gas pressure over the entire cross-section. 
 
The thickness of the piston head (tH ), according to Grashoff’s formula is given by 
 
t  = 
3 p. D2 
...(i) 
(in mm) 
H 
16σt 
where 
p = Maximum gas pressure or explosion pressure in N/mm2, 
D = Cylinder bore or outside diameter of the piston in mm, and 
 
σt = Permissible bending (tensile) stress for the material of the piston 
in MPa or N/mm2. It may be taken as 35 to 40 MPa for grey cast 
iron, 50 to 90 MPa for nickel cast iron and aluminium alloy and 
60 to 100 MPa for forged steel. 
 
On the basis of second consideration of heat transfer, the thickness of the piston head should 
be such that the heat absorbed by the piston due combustion of fuel is quickly transferred to the 
cylinder walls. Treating the piston head as a flat ciucular plate, its thickness is given by 
 
tH  = 
H 
(in mm) 
...(ii) 
12.56k (TC − TE ) 
 
* 
The coefficient of thermal expansion for aluminium is 0.24 × 10–6 m / °C and for cast iron it is 0.1 × 10–6 m / °C.  
 
** The heat conductivity for aluminium is 174.75 W/m/°C and for cast iron it is 46.6 W/m /°C.  
 
*** The density of aluminium is 2700 kg / m3 and for cast iron it is 7200 kg / m3.  
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where 
H = Heat flowing through the piston head in kJ/s or watts, 
k = Heat conductivity factor in W/m/°C. Its value is 46.6 W/m/°C for 
grey cast iron, 51.25 W/m/°C for steel and 174.75 W/m/°C for 
aluminium alloys. 
TC  = Temperture at the centre of the piston head in °C, and 
TE  = Temperature at the edges of the piston head in °C. 
The temperature difference (TC – TE) may be taken as 220°C for cast iron and 75°C for aluminium. 
The heat flowing through the positon head (H) may be deternined by the following expression, i.e., 
 
H = C × HCV × m × B.P. (in kW) 
 
where 
C = Constant representing that portion of the heat supplied to the engine 
 
which is absorbed by the piston. Its value is usually taken as 
0.05. 
 
HCV = Higher calorific value of the fuel in kJ/kg. It may be taken as 45 
× 103 kJ/kg for diesel and 47 × 103 kJ/ kg for petrol, 
 
m = Mass of the fuel used in kg per brake power per second, and 
B.P. = Brake power of the engine per cylinder 
Notes : 1. The thickness of the piston head (tH) is calculated by using equations (i) and (ii) and larger of the 
two values obtained should be adopted. 
 
2. When tH is 6 mm or less, then no ribs are required to strengthen the piston head against gas loads. 
But when tH is greater then 6 mm, then a suitable number of ribs at the centre line of the boss extending 
around the skirt should be provided to distribute the side thrust from the connecting rod and thus to prevent 
distortion of the skirt. The thickness of the ribs may be takes as tH / 3 to tH / 2. 
 
3. For engines having length of stroke to cylinder bore (L / D) ratio upto 1.5, a cup is provided in the 
top of the piston head with a radius equal to 0.7 D. This is done to provide a space for combustion chamber. 
 
32.9 Piston Rings 
 
The piston rings are used to impart the necessary radial pressure to maintain the seal between 
the piston and the cylinder bore. These are usually made of grey cast iron or alloy cast iron 
because of their good wearing properties and also they retain spring characteristics even at high 
temperatures. The piston rings are of the following two types : 
 
1. Compression rings or pressure rings, and  
 
2. Oil control rings or oil scraper.  
 
The compression rings or pressure rings are inserted in the grooves at the top portion of the 
piston and may be three to seven in number. These rings also transfer heat from the piston to the 
cylinder liner and absorb some part of the piston fluctuation due to the side thrust. 
 
The oil control rings or oil scrapers are provided below the compression rings. These rings 
provide proper lubrication to the liner by allowing sufficient oil to move up during upward stroke 
and at the same time scraps the lubricating oil from the surface of the liner in order to minimise 
the flow of the oil to the combustion chamber. 
 
The compression rings are usually made of rectangular cross-section and the diameter of the 
ring is slightly larger than the cylinder bore. A part of the ring is cut- off in order to permit it to go 
into the cylinder against the liner wall. The diagonal cut or step cut ends, as shown in Fig. 32.4 (a) 
and (b) respectively, may be used. The gap between the ends should be sufficiently large when the 
ring is put cold so that even at the highest temperature, the ends do not touch each other when the 
ring expands, otherwise there might be buckling of the ring. 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.4. Piston rings. 
 
The radial thickness (t1) of the ring may be obtained by considering the radial pressure 
between the cylinder wall and the ring. From bending stress consideration in the ring, the radial 
thickness is given by 
t = D 3 pw 
σt 
1
where 
D = Cylinder bore in mm, 
 
pw = Pressure of gas on the cylinder wall in N/mm2. Its value is 
limited from 0.025 N/mm2 to 0.042 N/mm2, and 
 
σt = Allowable bending (tensile) stress in MPa. Its value may be taken 
from 85 MPa to 110 MPa for cast iron rings. 
 
The axial thickness (t2 ) of the rings may be taken as 0.7 t1 to t1. 
The minimum axial thickness (t2 ) may also be obtained from the following empirical relation: 
 
D 
t
2 =
 10nR 
where 
nR  = Number of rings. 
 
The width of the top land (i.e. the distance from the top of the piston to the first ring groove) 
is made larger than other ring lands to protect the top ring from high temperature conditions 
existing at the top of the piston, 
 
∴  Width of top land, 
b1  = tH to 1.2 tH 
 
The width of other ring lands (i.e. the distance between the ring grooves) in the piston may 
be made equal to or slightly less than the axial thickness of the ring (t2). 
∴ Width of other ring lands, 
 
b2  = 0.75 t2 to t2 
 
The depth of the ring grooves should be more than the depth of the ring so that the ring does 
not take any piston side thrust. 
 
The gap between the free ends of the ring is given by 3.5 t1 to 4 t1. The gap, when the ring is 
in the cylinder, should be 0.002 D to 0.004 D. 
 
32.10 Piston Barrel 
 
It is a cylindrical portion of the piston. The maximum thickness (t3) of the piston barrel may 
be obtained from the following empirical relation : 
 
t3  = 0.03 D + b + 4.5 mm 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
where 
b = Radial depth of piston ring groove which is taken as 0.4 mm larger 
than the radial thickness of the piston ring (t1) 
= t1 + 0.4 mm 
Thus, the above relation may be written as 
 
t3  = 0.03 D + t1 + 4.9 mm 
 
The piston wall thickness (t4) towards the open end is decreased and should be taken as 0.25 
t3 to 0.35 t3. 
 
32.11 Piston Skirt 
 
The portion of the piston below the ring section is known as piston skirt. In acts as a bearing 
for the side thrust of the connecting rod. The length of the piston skirt should be such that the 
bearing pressure on the piston barrel due to the side thrust does not exceed 0.25 N/mm2 of the 
projected area for low speed engines and 0.5 N/mm2 for high speed engines. It may be noted that 
the maximum thrust will be during the expansion stroke. The side thrust (R) on the cylinder liner 
is usually taken as 1/10 of the maximum gas load on the piston. 
 
We know that maximum gas load on the piston, 
 
P = p  
πD2 
4 
∴ Maximum side thrust on the cylinder, 
R = P/10 = 0.1 p  πD2 
...(i) 
4 
where 
p = Maximum gas pressure in N/mm2, and 
 
D = Cylinder bore in mm. 
The side thrust (R) is also given by 
 
R = Bearing pressure × Projected bearing area of the piston skirt 
 
= pb × D × l 
 
where 
l = Length of the piston skirt in mm. 
...(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
From equations (i) and (ii), the length of the piston skirt (l) is determined. In actual practice, 
the length of the piston skirt is taken as 0.65 to 0.8 times the cylinder bore. Now the total length of 
the piston (L) is given by 
 
L = Length of skirt + Length of ring section + Top land 
 
The length of the piston usually varies between D and 1.5 D. It may be noted that a longer piston 
provides better bearing surface for quiet running of the engine, but it should not be made unnecessarily 
 
long as it will increase its own mass and thus the inertia 
forces. 
 
32.12 Piston Pin 
 
The piston pin (also called gudgeon pin or wrist pin) 
is used to connect the piston and the connecting rod. It is 
 
usually made hollow and tapered on the inside, the smallest 
 
 
inside diameter being at the centre of the pin, as shown in Fig. 32.5. 
The 
piston pin passes through the bosses provided on the inside of the piston skirt and the bush of the 
small end of the connecting rod. The centre of piston pin should be 0.02 D to 0.04 D above the 
centre of the skirt, in order to off-set the turning effect of the friction and to obtain uniform 
distribution of pressure between the piston and the cylinder liner. 
 
The material used for the piston pin is usually case hardened steel alloy containing nickel, 
chromium, molybdenum or vanadium having tensile strength from 710 MPa to 910 MPa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.6. Full floating type piston pin. 
 
The connection between the piston pin and the small end of the connecting rod may be made 
either full floating type or semi-floating type. In the full floating type, the piston pin is free to turn 
both in the *piston bosses and the bush of the small end of the connecting rod. The end 
movements of the piston pin should be secured by means of spring circlips, as shown in Fig. 32.6, 
in order to prevent the pin from touching and scoring the cylinder liner. 
 
In the semi-floating type, the piston pin is either free to turn in the piston bosses and rigidly 
secured to the small end of the connecting rod, or it is free to turn in the bush of the small end of 
the connecting rod and is rigidly secured in the piston bosses by means of a screw, as shown in 
Fig. 32.7 
 
The piston pin should be designed for the maximum gas load or the inertia force of the piston, 
whichever is larger. The bearing area of the piston pin should be about equally divided between the 
piston pin bosses and the connecting rod bushing. Thus, the length of the pin in the connecting rod 
bushing will be about 0.45 of the cylinder bore or piston diameter (D), allowing for the end clearance 
 
* 
The mean diameter of the piston bosses is made 1.4 d0 for cast iron pistons and 1.5 d0 for aluminium 
pistons, where d0 is the outside diameter of the piston pin. The piston bosses are usually tapered, 
increasing the diameter towards the piston wall.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.32.5. Piston pin. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  
of the pin etc. The outside diameter of the piston pin (d0 ) is determined by equating the load on 
the piston due to gas pressure (p) and the load on the piston pin due to bearing pressure ( pb1 ) at 
the small end of the connecting rod bushing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Piston pin secured to the small 
end of the connecting rod. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Piston pin secured to the boss 
of the piston. 
 
Fig. 32.7. Semi-floating type piston pin. 
Let 
d0 
l1 
p
b1 
 
= Outside diameter of the piston pin in mm  
 
= Length of the piston pin in the bush of the small end of the 
connecting rod in mm. Its value is usually taken as 0.45 D.  
 
= Bearing pressure at the small end of the connecting rod bushing in 
N/mm2. Its value for the bronze bushing may be taken as 25 N/mm2.  
We know that load on the piston due to gas pressure or gas load 
 
= π  D 2   p 
..(i)
4 
and load on the piston pin due to bearing pressure or bearing load 
= Bearing pressure × Bearing area = pb1 × d0 × l1 
...(ii)
From equations (i) and (ii), the outside diameter of the piston pin (d0) may be obtained. 
 
The piston pin may be checked in bending by assuming the gas load to be uniformly 
distributed over the length l1 with supports at the centre of 
 
the bosses at the two ends. From Fig. 32.8, we 
find that the length between the supports, 
l = l  
   D
 −  l
1
  l
1  
  D 
2 
1 
2 
2 
Now maximum bending moment at the 
centre of the pin, 
M =
P  
l
2
− 
P 
l
1 
l
1 
2 
2
l 
2 
4 
1 
=P   l
2 − P  l1 
2 
2 
2 
4 
=P l1 
D − P  
l1
Fig. 32.8 
2 
2
2
4
2 
=
P.
 l
1 
  P.D
 −  P.
 l
1 
P.D 
...(iii) 
8 
8 
8 
8 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  
We have already discussed that the piston pin is made hollow. Let d0 and di be the outside 
and inside diameters of the piston pin. We know that the section modulus, 
 
π ( d0 )4 
− (di )4 
Z = 32 
d0 
We know that maximum bending moment, 
π 
( d 0 )4 − (d )4 
M = Z  σ b  
i
σb 
32 
d
0 
where 
σb  = Allowable bending stress for the material of the piston pin. It is
usually taken as 84 MPa for case hardened carbon steel and
140 MPa for heat treated alloy steel. 
Assuming di = 0.6 d0, the induced bending stress in the piston pin may be checked. 
  
Example 32.2. Design a cast iron piston for a single acting four stroke engine for the following 
 
data: 
 
Cylinder bore = 100 mm ; Stroke = 125 mm ; Maximum gas pressure = 5 N/mm2 ; Indicated 
mean effective pressure = 0.75 N/mm2 ; Mechanical efficiency = 80% ; Fuel consumption = 0.15 kg 
per brake power per hour ; Higher calorific value of fuel = 42 × 103 kJ/kg ; Speed = 2000 r.p.m. 
Any other data required for the design may be assumed. 
Solution. Given : D = 100 mm ; L = 125 mm = 0.125 m ; p = 5 N/mm2 ; pm = 0.75 N/mm2; 
ηm = 80% = 0.8 ; m = 0.15 kg / BP / h = 41.7 × 10–6 kg / BP / s; HCV = 42 × 103 kJ / kg ; N = 
2000 r.p.m. 
 
The dimensions for various components of the piston are determined as follows : 
 
1. Piston head or crown 
 
The thickness of the piston head or crown is determined on the basis of strength as well as on 
the basis of heat dissipation and the larger of the two values is adopted. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
  
We know that the thickness of piston head on the basis of strength, 
 
t 
=
3 p . D2 
3  5(100)2 
= 15.7 say 16 mm 
 
H 
16 σ t 
16  38 
...(Taking σt for cast iron = 38 MPa = 38 N/mm2) 
 
Since the engine is a four stroke engine, therefore, the number of working strokes per 
minute, n = N / 2 = 2000 / 2 = 1000 
 
and cross-sectional area of the cylinder, 
A = π  D 2   π  (100)2 
  7855 mm 2 
4 
4 
We know that indicated power, 
IP = p m . L . A.n 
  0.75   0.125   7855  1000  12 270 W 
60 
60 
=12.27 kW 
∴  Brake power, 
BP =IP × ηm  = 12.27 × 0.8 = 9.8 kW 
...(Q ηm  = BP / IP) 
 
We know that the heat flowing through the piston head, 
 
H = C × HCV × m × BP  
= 0.05 × 42 × 103 × 41.7 × 10–6 × 9.8 = 0.86 kW = 860 W  
....(Taking C = 0.05) 
 
∴Thickness of the piston head on the basis of heat dissipation, 
 
H 
860 
tH  = 
 0.0067 m  6.7 mm 
12.56 k (TC − TE ) 
12.56  46.6  220 
...(Q For cast iron , k = 46.6 W/m/°C, and TC – TE = 220°C) 
Taking the larger of the two values, we shall adopt 
tH  = 16 mm Ans. 
 
Since the ratio of L / D is 1.25, therefore a cup in the top of the piston head with a radius equal 
 
to 0.7 D (i.e. 70 mm) is provided. 
 
2. Radial ribs 
 
The radial ribs may be four in number. The thickness of the ribs varies from tH / 3 to tH / 2. 
∴ Thickness of the ribs, tR = 16 / 3 to 16 / 2 = 5.33 to 8 mm 
Let us adopt 
tR  = 7 mm Ans. 
3. Piston rings 
 
Let us assume that there are total four rings (i.e. nr = 4) out of which three are compression 
rings and one is an oil ring. 
 
We know that the radial thickness of the piston rings, 
 
t1 = D 
3 pw 
 100 3   0.035 
  3.4 mm 
90 
σ t 
...(Taking pw = 0.035 N/mm2, and σt = 90 MPa) 
and axial thickness of the piston rings 
t
2 = 0.7 t1 to t1 = 0.7 × 3.4 to 3.4 mm = 2.38 to 3.4 mm 
Let us adopt 
t2 = 3 mm 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
We also know that the minimum axial thickness of the pistion ring, 
 
t2  = 
D 
 
100 
  2.5 mm 
10 nr 
10  4 
Thus the axial thickness of the piston ring as already calculated (i.e. t2 = 3 mm)is satisfactory. 
Ans. The distance from the top of the piston to the first ring groove, i.e. the width of the top land, 
b1 = tH to 1.2 tH = 16 to 1.2 × 16 mm = 16 to 19.2 mm 
and width of other ring lands, b
2= 0.75 t2 to t2 = 0.75 × 3 to 3 mm = 2.25 to 3 mm 
Let us adopt 
b1 = 18 mm ; and b2 = 2.5 mm Ans. 
We know that the gap between the free ends of the ring, 
G1= 3.5 t1 to 4 t1 = 3.5 × 3.4 to 4 × 3.4 mm = 11.9 to 13.6 mm 
and the gap when the ring is in the cylinder, 
G2= 0.002 D to 0.004 D = 0.002 × 100 to 0.004 × 100 mm 
= 0.2 to 0.4 mm 
Let us adopt 
G1 = 12.8 mm ; and G2 = 0.3 mm Ans. 
4. Piston barrel 
Since the radial depth of the piston ring grooves (b) is about 0.4 mm more than the radial 
thickness of the piston rings (t1), therefore, 
b = t1 + 0.4 = 3.4 + 0.4 = 3.8 mm 
We know that the maximum thickness of barrel, 
t
3= 0.03 D + b + 4.5 mm = 0.03 × 100 + 3.8 + 4.5 = 11.3 mm 
and piston wall thickness towards the open end, 
t
4= 0.25 t3 to 0.35 t3 = 0.25 × 11.3 to 0.35 × 11.3 = 2.8 to 3.9 mm 
Let us adopt 
t4= 3.4 mm 
5. Piston skirt 
Let 
l = Length of the skirt in mm. 
We know that the maximum side thrust on the cylinder due to gas pressure ( p ), 
R = μ  
π D2   p  0.1  π (100)2  5  3928 N 
4 
4 
...(Taking μ = 0.1) 
We also know that the side thrust due to bearing pressure on the piston barrel ( pb ), 
R = pb × D × l = 0.45 × 100 × l = 45 l N 
 
From above, we find that 
 
45 l = 3928 or l = 3928 / 45 = 87.3 say 90 
mm Ans. ∴ Total length of the piston , 
 
L = Length of the skirt + Length of the ring section + Top land 
= l + (4 t2 + 3b2) + b1 
= 90 + (4 × 3 + 3 × 3) + 18 = 129 say 130 mm Ans. 
6. Piston pin 
Let 
d0 = Outside diameter of the pin in mm, 
l1 = Length of pin in the bush of the small end of the connecting rod in 
mm, and 
 
 
 
 
 
...(Taking pb = 0.45 N/mm2) 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
p
b1 = Bearing pressure at the small end of the connecting rod bushing in 
N/mm2. It value for bronze bushing is taken as 25 N/mm2. 
We know that load on the pin due to bearing pressure 
= Bearing pressure × Bearing area = pb1 × d0 × l1 
= 25 × d0 × 0.45 × 100 = 1125 d0 N 
...(Taking l1 = 0.45 D) 
We also know that maximum load on the piston due to gas pressure or maximum gas load 
 
π D2   p  π (100)2  5  39 275 N 
4 
4 
From above, we find that 
 
1125 d0 = 39 275 or d0 = 39 275 / 1125 = 34.9 say 35 mm Ans. 
The inside diameter of the pin (di) is usually taken as 0.6 d0. 
 
di  = 0.6 × 35 = 21 mm Ans. 
 
Let the piston pin be made of heat treated alloy steel for which the bending stress ( σb )may 
be taken as 140 MPa. Now let us check the induced bending stress in the pin. 
 
We know that maximum bending moment at the centre of the pin, 
 
M = 
P . D 
39 275  100 
  491  103  N-mm 
8 
8 
We also know that maximum bending moment (M), 
π 
( d 0 )4 − (d )4 
π 
(35)4 − (21)4 
491 × 103  = 
i 
σ b 
σ b  3664 
σb 
32
d0 
32 
35 
∴ 
σb  = 491 × 103 / 3664 = 134 N/mm2 or MPa
Since the induced bending stress in the pin is less than the permissible value of 140 MPa (i.e. 
140 N/mm2), therefore, the dimensions for the pin as calculated above (i.e. d 
= 35 mm and d = 21 mm) 
are satisfactory. 
0
i 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
32.13 Connecting Rod 
 
The connecting rod is the intermediate member between the piston and the crankshaft. Its primary 
function is to transmit the push and pull from the piston pin to the crankpin and thus convert the reciprocating 
motion of the piston into the rotary motion of the crank. The usual form of the connecting rod in internal 
combustion engines is shown in Fig. 32.9. It consists of a long shank, a small end and a big end. The cross-
section of the shank may be rectangular, circular, tubular, I-section or H-section. Generally circular section is 
used for low speed engines while I-section is preferred for high speed engines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.9. Connecting rod. 
 
The *length of the connecting rod ( l ) depends upon the ratio of l / r, where r is the radius of 
crank. It may be noted that the smaller length will decrease the ratio l / r. This increases the angularity 
of the connecting rod which increases the side thrust of the piston against the cylinder liner which in 
turn increases the wear of the liner. The larger length of the connecting rod will increase the ratio l / r. 
This decreases the angularity of the connecting rod and thus decreases the side thrust and the resulting 
wear of the cylinder. But the larger length of the connecting rod increases the overall height of the 
engine. Hence, a compromise is made and the ratio l / r is generally kept as 4 to 5. 
 
The small end of the connecting rod is usually made in the form of an eye and is provided 
with a bush of phosphor bronze. It is connected to the piston by means of a piston pin. 
 
The big end of the connecting rod is usually made split (in two **halves) so that it can be 
mounted easily on the crankpin bearing shells. The split cap is fastened to the big end with two cap 
bolts. The bearing shells of the big end are made of steel, brass or bronze with a thin lining (about 0.75 
mm) of white metal or babbit metal. The wear of the big end bearing is allowed for by inserting thin 
metallic strips (known as shims) about 0.04 mm thick between the cap and the fixed half of the 
connecting rod. As the wear takes place, one or more strips are removed and the bearing is trued up. 
 
* 
It is the distance between the centres of small end and big end of the connecting rod.  
 
** One half is fixed with the connecting rod and the other half (known as cap) is fastened with two cap bolts.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  
The connecting rods are usually manufactured by drop forging process and it should have 
adequate strength, stiffness and minimum weight. The material mostly used for connecting rods 
varies from mild carbon steels (having 0.35 to 0.45 percent carbon) to alloy steels (chrome-nickel 
or chrome-molybdenum steels). The carbon steel having 0.35 percent carbon has an ultimate 
tensile strength of about 650 MPa when properly heat treated and a carbon steel with 0.45 percent 
carbon has a ultimate tensile strength of 750 MPa. These steels are used for connecting rods of 
industrial engines. The alloy steels have an ultimate tensile strength of about 1050 MPa and are 
used for connecting rods of aeroengines and automobile engines. 
 
The bearings at the two ends of the connecting rod are either splash lubricated or pressure 
lubricated. The big end bearing is usually splash lubricated while the small end bearing is pressure 
lubricated. In the splash lubrication system, the cap at the big end is provided with a dipper or 
spout and set at an angle in such a way that when the connecting rod moves downward, the spout 
will dip into the lubricating oil contained in the sump. The oil is forced up the spout and then to 
the big end bearing. Now when the connecting rod moves upward, a splash of oil is produced by 
the spout. This splashed up lubricant find its way into the small end bearing through the widely 
chamfered holes provided on the upper surface of the small end. 
 
In the pressure lubricating system, the lubricating oil is fed under pressure to the big end bearing 
through the holes drilled in crankshaft, crankwebs and crank pin. From the big end bearing, the oil is fed to 
small end bearing through a fine hole drilled in the shank of the connecting rod. In some cases, the small end 
bearing is lubricated by the oil scrapped from the walls of the cyinder liner by the oil scraper rings. 
 
32.14 Forces Acting on the Connecting Rod 
 
The various forces acting on the connecting rod are as follows : 
 
1. Force on the piston due to gas pressure and inertia of the reciprocating parts,  
 
2. Force due to inertia of the connecting rod or inertia bending forces,  
 
3. Force due to friction of the piston rings and of the piston, and  
 
4. Force due to friction of the piston pin bearing and the crankpin bearing.  
 
We shall now derive the expressions for the forces acting on a vertical engine, as discussed below. 
 
1. Force on the piston due to gas pressure and inertia of reciprocating parts 
 
Consider a connecting rod PC as shown in Fig. 32.10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.10. Forces on the connecting rod. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
Compressed 
Spark 
plug 
Rotor 
fuel-air mix 
 
Fuel-air 
 
mix in 
 
Exhaust 
out 
1. Induction : turning 
2. Compression: Fuel-air 
3. Ignition: Compressed 4. Exhuast : the rotor 
rotor sucks in mixture of 
mixture is compressed as 
fuel-air mixture is ignited continues to turn and 
petrol and air. 
rotor carriers it round. 
by the spark plug. 
pushed out waste 
gases. 
Let 
p = Maximum pressure of gas, 
D = Diameter of piston, 
A = Cross-section area of piston = 
π  D2 
4 , 
mR  = Mass of reciprocating parts, 
1 
= Mass of piston, gudgeon pin etc. + 3 rd mass of connecting rod, 
ω  = Angular speed of crank, 
 
φ = Angle of inclination of the connecting rod with the line of 
stroke, θ = Angle of inclination of the crank from top dead centre, 
 
r = Radius of crank, 
 
l = Length of connecting rod, and 
 
n = Ratio of length of connecting rod to radius of crank = l / r. 
We know that the force on the piston due to pressure of gas, 
 
FL = Pressure × Area = p . A = p × π D2 
/4 and inertia force of reciprocating parts, 
 
2 
cos 2θ
FI  = Mass × *Acceleration = mR . ω  . r cos θ  
n 
 
It may be noted that the inertia force of reciprocating parts opposes the force on the piston 
when it moves during its downward stroke (i. e. when the piston moves from the top dead centre 
to bottom dead centre). On the other hand, the inertia force of the reciprocating parts helps the 
force on the piston when it moves from the bottom dead centre to top dead centre. 
 
∴ Net force acting on the piston or piston pin (or gudgeon pin or wrist pin), 
FP = Force due to gas pressure m Inertia force 
 
= FL m FI 
 
The –ve sign is used when piston moves from TDC to BDC and +ve sign is used when 
piston moves from BDC to TDC. 
When weight of the reciprocating parts (WR = mR . g) is to be taken into consideration, then 
 
FP  = FL 
m
 F1  WR 
2
cos 2θ 
*   Acceleration of reciprocating parts = ω· r  cos θ  
n 
 
 
 
 
 
Top 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Contents 
 
 
Internal Combustion Engine Parts  „  1147 
 
The force FP gives rise to a force FC in the connecting rod and a thrust FN on the sides of the 
cylinder walls. From Fig. 32.10, we see that force in the connecting rod at any instant, 
FC  = 
F P 
 
*
 FP 
cos φ 
1 − sin 2 θ 
n 2
 
The force in the connecting rod will be maximum when the crank and the connecting rod are 
perpendicular to each other (i.e. when θ = 90°). But at this position, the gas pressure would be de-
creased considerably. Thus, for all practical purposes, the force in the connecting rod (FC) is 
taken equal to the maximum force on the piston due to pressure of gas (FL), neglecting piston 
inertia effects. 
 
2. Force due to inertia of the connecting rod or inertia bending forces 
 
Consider a connecting rod PC and a crank OC rotating with uniform angular velocity ω rad / s. In 
order to find the accleration of various points on the connecting rod, draw the Klien’s acceleration 
diagram CQNO as shown in Fig. 32.11 (a). CO represents the acceleration of C towards O and NO 
represents the accleration of P towards O. The acceleration of other points such as D, E, F and G etc., 
on the connecting rod PC may be found by drawing horizontal lines from these points to intresect CN at 
d, e, f, and g respectively. Now dO, eO, fO and gO respresents the acceleration of D, E, F and G all 
towards O. The inertia force acting on each point will be as follows: 
 
Inertia force at C = m × ω2 × CO 
Inertia force at D = m × ω2 × dO 
Inertia force at E = m × ω2 × eO, and so on. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.11. Inertia bending forces. 
 
The inertia forces will be opposite to the direction of acceleration or centrifugal forces. The 
inertia forces can be resolved into two components, one parallel to the connecting rod and the other 
perpendicular to rod. The parallel (or longitudinal) components adds up algebraically to the force 
 
* 
For derivation, please refer ot Authors’ popular book on ‘Theory of Machines’.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  
acting on the connecting rod (FC) and produces thrust on the pins. The perpendicular (or 
transverse) components produces bending action (also called whipping action) and the stress 
induced in the connecting rod is called whipping stress. 
 
It may be noted that the perpendicular components will be maximum, when the crank and 
connecting rod are at right angles to each other. 
 
The variation of the inertia force on the connecting rod is linear and is like a simply 
supported beam of variable loading as shown in Fig. 32.11 (b) and (c). Assuming that the 
connecting rod is of uniform cross-section and has mass m1 kg per unit length, therefore, 
Inertia force per unit length at the crankpin 
= m1 × ω2 r 
 
and inertia force per unit length at the piston 
pin = 0 
 
Inertia force due to small element of length dx at a distance x from the piston pin P, 
x 
dF1  = m1 × ω2r × l  × dx 
∴ Resultant inertia force, 
 
l 
x
m 
 ω2 r  x 2 l 
FI  = ∫m1  ω 2r  
 dx 
 
1
l
l 
2
0 
0 
= m1.l  ω2r  m  ω2r 
...(Substituting m · l = m) 
2 
2
1 
This resultant inertia force acts at a distance of 2l / 3 from the piston pin P. 
1 
Since it has been assumed that 3 rd mass of the connecting rod is concentrated at piston pin P 
2 
(i.e. small end of connecting rod) and 3 rd at the crankpin (i.e. big end of connecting rod), therefore, 
 
the reaction at these two ends will be in the same proportion. 
i.e. RP = 1
3 F I , an d R C  2
3 FI 
 
Honeycomb 
coated with 
metal catalysts 
 
To exhaust 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co Carbon monoxide 
CO2 Carbon dioxide 
NOx Nitrous oxides 
HC Hydrocarbons 
N2 Nitrogen 
Metal casing 
H2O Water 
 
Emissions of an automobile. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Now the bending moment acting on the rod at section X – X at a distance x from P, 
 
M  = R P    x − *m 1    ω 2 r  
x 
1 x  
x 
l 
2
3
X 
1 
m .l 
2
x3 
= 3 F
I   x
 − 
1
ω r  
2
3 l 
2 
...(Multiplying and dividing the latter expression by l) 
F  x 
x 3 
F 
x3 
= 
I 
−  FI 
I x − 
...(i) 
2 
2
3 
3l 
3 
l 
For maximum bending moment, differentiate MX with respect to x and equate to zero, i.e. 
d 
MX 
F 
3x2 
= 0  or 
I 1 − 
 0 
dx 
3 
l2
∴ 
1 − 
3 x 2 
= 0  or 
3x2  l2 or x  
l 
l 
2 
3 
Maximum bending moment, 
l 
3
F
I 
l 
3 
M
max = 
− 
...[From equation (i)] 
3 
3 
l 
2 
F l 
l 
F  l 
2
2F  l 
= 
I 
− 
I 
 
 
I 
3 
3  3 
3
9  3 
3   3  3 
= 2  
m 
 ω2 r  
l
 m  ω2r 
l 
2 
9  3 
9  3
and the maximum bending stress, due to inertia of the connecting rod, 
σmax = 
M
max 
Z 
where 
Z = Section modulus. 
 
From above we see that the maximum bending moment varies as the square of speed, therefore, 
the bending stress due to high speed will be dangerous. It may be noted that the maximum axial force 
and the maximum bending stress do not occur simultaneously. In an I.C. engine, the maximum gas load 
occurs close to top dead centre whereas the maximum bending stress occurs when the crank angle θ = 
65° to 70° from top dead centre. The pressure of gas falls suddenly as the piston moves from dead 
centre. Thus the general practice is to design a connecting rod by assuming the force in the 
connecting rod (FC) equal to the maximum force due to pressure (FL), neglecting piston inertia 
effects and then checked for bending stress due to inertia force (i.e. whipping stress). 
 
3. Force due to friction of piston rings and of the piston 
 
The frictional force ( F ) of the piston rings may be determined by using the following expression 
 
:  
F = π D · tR · nR · pR · 
μ where D = Cylinder bore, 
 
tR  = Axial width of rings, 
 
* B.M. due to variable force from 0 to m1 ω2r  x 
is equal to the area of triangle multiplied by the distance 
x 
l 
of C.G. from 
X −  X  i.e. 
. 
3 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
  
nR  = Number of rings, 
 
pR = Pressure of rings (0.025 to 0.04 N/mm2), 
and μ = Coefficient of friction (about 0.1). 
 
Since the frictional force of the piston rings is usually very small, therefore, it may be 
neglected. 
 
The friction of the piston is produced by the normal component of the piston pressure which 
varies from 3 to 10 percent of the piston pressure. If the coefficient of friction is about 0.05 to 
0.06, then the frictional force due to piston will be about 0.5 to 0.6 of the piston pressure, which is 
very low. Thus, the frictional force due to piston is also neglected. 
 
4. Force due to friction of the piston pin bearing and crankpin bearing 
 
The force due to friction of the piston pin bearing and crankpin bearing, is to bend the 
connecting rod and to increase the compressive stress on the connecting rod due to the direct load. 
Thus, the maximum compressive stress in the connecting rod will be 
 
σc (max) = Direct compressive stress + Maximum bending or whipping 
stress due to inertia bending stress 
 
32.15 Design of Connecting Rod 
 
In designing a connecting rod, the following dimensions are required to be determined : 
 
1. Dimensions of cross-section of the connecting rod,  
 
2. Dimensions of the crankpin at the big end and the piston pin at the small end,  
 
3. Size of bolts for securing the big end cap, and  
 
4. Thickness of the big end cap.  
 
The procedure adopted in determining the above mentioned dimensions is discussed as below : 
 
 
 
 
Evaporators change 
liquid hydrogen to gas 
Fuel tank 
 
Engine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This experimental car burns hydrogen fuel in an ordinary piston engine. Its exhaust gases cause no pollution, 
because they contain only water vapour. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
  
1. Dimensions of cross-section of the connecting rod 
 
A connecting rod is a machine member which is subjected to alternating direct compressive 
and tensile forces. Since the compressive forces are much higher than the tensile forces, therefore, 
the cross-section of the connecting rod is designed as a strut and the Rankine’s formula is used. 
 
A connecting rod, as shown in Fig. 32.12, subjected to an axial load W may buckle with X-
axis as neutral axis (i.e. in the plane of motion of the connecting rod) or Y-axis as neutral axis (i.e. 
in the plane perpendicular to the plane of motion). The connecting rod is considered like both ends 
hinged for buckling about X-axis and both ends fixed for buckling about Y-axis. 
 
A connecting rod should be equally strong in buckling about both the axes. 
 
Let 
A = Cross-sectional area of the connecting rod, 
 
l = Length of the connecting rod, 
σc = Compressive yield stress, 
WB  = Buckling load, 
Ixx and Iyy = Moment of inertia of the section about X-axis and Y-axis 
respectively, and 
kxx and kyy = Radius of gyration of the section about X-axis and Y-axis 
respectively. 
 
According to Rankine’s formula, 
 
 
 
 
 
and 
 
 
 
 
where 
 
WB about X − axis = 
σ c . A 
σc .A 
...(Q For both ends hinged, L = l)
L 
2 
l 2 
1   a 
1   a 
k xx 
k xx 
WB about Y − axis  
σ c . A 
σc .A 
...[Q For both ends fixed, L = l ]
2 
2 
L 
l 
2 
1  a 
1  a 
k
 yy 
2
 k
yy 
 
L = Equivalent length of the connecting rod, and 
 
a = Constant  
 
= 1 / 7500, for mild steel  
 
= 1 / 9000, for wrought iron  
 
= 1 / 1600, for cast iron  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.12. Buckling of connecting rod. 
 
In order to thave a connecting rod equally strong in buckling about both the axes, the 
buckling loads must be equal, i.e. 
 
σ c . A 
σc . A 
l 
2 
l 
2 
 
or 
 
l 
2
l 
2
k xx 
2 kyy 
1  a 
1  a
k
 xx 
2
 k
yy
∴ 
k xx
2  4 k yy
2 
or 
I
 xx  4 I yy 
...(QI = A · k2) 
 
 
 
 
Top 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Contents 
 
 
1152 „ A Textbook of Machine Design 
 
This shows that the connecting rod is four times 
strong in buckling about Y-axis than about X-axis. If Ixx 
> 4 I yy, then buckling will occur about Y- axis and if 
Ixx < 4 Iyy, buckling will occur about X-axis. In actual 
practice, Ixx is kept slightly less than 4 Iyy. It is usually 
taken between 3 and 3.5 and the connecting rod is 
designed for bucking about X-axis. The design will 
always be satisfactory for buckling about Y-axis. 
 
The most suitable section for the connecting 
rod is I-section with the proportions as shown in 
Fig. 32.13 (a). 
 
Let thickness of the flange and web of the 
section = t 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 32.13. I-section of connecting rod. 
 
Width of the section, B = 4 t 
and depth or height of the section, 
 
H = 5t 
 
From Fig. 32.13 (a), we find that area of the section, 
A = 2 (4 t × t) + 3 t × t = 11 t2 
Moment of inertia of the section about X-axis, 
 
Ixx = 12
1
 4 t (5 t ) 3 − 3 t (3 t )3  419
12 
t 4 and moment of inertia of the section about Y-axis, 
 
1 
t   (4t ) 
3
 
1 
3
131
4 
Iyy = 2 
(3t ) t 
t 
12 
12 
12 
∴ 
I
xx 
419
12 
 3.2 
I
 yy 
12
131 
Since the value of 
I
xx lies between 3 and 3.5, therefore, I-section chosen is quite satisfactory.
I
 yy 
 
After deciding the proportions for I-section of the connecting rod, its dimensions are 
determined by considering the buckling of the rod about X-axis (assuming both ends hinged) and 
applying the Rankine’s formula. We know that buckling load, 
 
σc .A 
WB =
 1  a k
L
xx 2 
 
The buckling load (WB) may be calculated by using the following relation, 
i.e. WB = Max. gas force × Factor of safety 
The factor of safety may be taken as 5 to 6. 
 
Notes : (a) The I-section of the connecting rod is used due to its lightness and to keep the inertia forces as 
low as possible specially in case of high speed engines. It can also withstand high gas pressure. 
 
(b) Sometimes a connecting rod may have rectangular section. For slow speed engines, circular section 
may be used. 
 
(c) Since connecting rod is manufactured by forging, therefore the sharp corner of I-section are 
rounded off as shown in Fig. 32.13 (b) for easy removal of the section from dies. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
The dimensions B = 4 t and H = 5 t, as obtained above by applying the Rankine’s formula, 
are at the middle of the connecting rod. The width of the section (B) is kept constant throughout 
the length of the connecting rod, but the depth or height varies. The depth near the small end (or 
piston end) is taken as H1 = 0.75 H to 0.9H and the depth near the big end (or crank end) is taken 
H2 = 1.1H to 1.25H. 
 
2. Dimensions of the crankpin at the big end and the piston pin at the small end 
 
Since the dimensions of the crankpin at the big end and the piston pin (also known as 
gudgeon pin or wrist pin) at the small end are limited, therefore, fairly high bearing pressures have 
to be allowed at the bearings of these two pins. 
 
The crankpin at the big end 
has removable precision bearing 
shells of brass or bronze or steel 
with a thin lining (1 mm or less) 
of bearing metal (such as tin, lead, 
babbit, copper, lead) on the inner 
surface of the shell. The allowable 
bearing pressure on the crankpin 
depends upon many factors such 
as  material  of  the  bearing, 
viscosity of the lubricating oil, 
method of lubrication and the 
space limitations.The value of 
bearing pressure may be taken 
as 7 N/mm2  to 12.5 N/mm2 
depending upon the material and 
method of lubrication used. 
Engine of a motorcyle. 
 
The piston pin bearing is usually a phosphor bronze bush of about 3 mm thickness and the 
allowable bearing pressure may be taken as 10.5 N/mm2 to 15 N/mm2. 
 
Since the maximum load to be carried by the crankpin and piston pin bearings is the 
maximum force in the connecting rod (FC), therefore the dimensions for these two pins are 
determined for the maximum force in the connecting rod (FC) which is taken equal to the 
maximum force on the piston due to gas pressure (FL) neglecting the inertia forces. 
We know that maximum gas force, 
 
F = π  D2   p 
...(i) 
4 
L 
where 
D = Cylinder bore or piston diameter in mm, and 
p = Maximum gas pressure in N/mm2 
 
Now the dimensions of the crankpin and piston pin are determined as discussed below 
: Let dc = Diameter of the crank pin in mm, 
lc = Length of the crank pin in mm, 
pbc = Allowable bearing pressure in N/mm2, and 
dp, lp and pbp = Corresponding values for the piston pin, 
We know that load on the crank pin 
 
= Projected area × Bearing pressure 
 
= dc . lc . pbc ...(ii) Similarly, load on the piston pin 
 
= dp . lp . pbp 
...(iii) 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
Equating equations (i) and (ii), we have 
FL  = dc · lc · pbc 
Taking lc = 1.25 dc to 1.5 dc, the value of dc and lc are determined from the above 
expression. Again, equating equations (i) and (iii), we have 
FL  = dp · lp · pbp 
Taking lp = 1.5 dp to 2 dp, the value of dp and lp are determined from the above expression. 
3. Size of bolts for securing the big end cap 
 
The bolts and the big end cap are subjected to tensile force which corresponds to the inertia 
force of the reciprocating parts at the top dead centre on the exhaust stroke. We know that inertia 
force of the reciprocating parts, 
 
2
cos 2θ 
∴ 
F  = 
mR 
.ω .r  cos θ  
I 
l / r 
 
We also know that at the top dead centre, the angle of inclination of the crank with the line 
of stroke, θ = 0 
 
2 
r 
∴ 
FI
 mR .ω  .r 1  
l 
where 
mR = Mass of the reciprocating parts in kg, 
ω = Angular speed of the engine in rad / s, 
r = Radius of the crank in metres, and 
l = Length of the connecting rod in metres. 
The bolts may be made of high carbon steel or nickel alloy steel. Since the bolts are under 
repeated stresses but not alternating stresses, therefore, a factor of safety may be taken as 6. 
Let 
d
cb = Core diameter of the bolt in mm, 
σt = Allowable tensile stress for the material of the bolts in MPa, and 
∴ Force on the bolts nb = Number of bolts. Generally two bolts are used. 
= π ( d 
cb 
)2 σ   n 
4 
t 
b 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Equating the inertia force to the force on the bolts, we have 
 
F 
= 
π 
( d cb ) 2 σ t    nb 
I 
4 
From this expression, dcb is obtained. The nominal or major diameter (db) of the bolt is given by 
db  =  dcb 
0.84 
4. Thickness of the big end cap 
The thickness of the big end cap (tc) may be determined by treating the cap as a beam freely 
supported at the cap bolt centres and loaded by the inertia force at the top dead centre on the 
exhaust stroke (i.e. FI when θ 
). This load is assumed to act in between the uniformly 
distributed load and the centrally concentrated load. Therefore, the maximum bending moment 
acting on the cap will be taken as 
M 
C
= * FI  x 
6 
where 
x = Distance between the bolt centres.
= Dia. of crankpin or big end bearing (dc) + 2 × Thickness of bearing 
liner (3 mm) + Clearance (3 mm) 
Let 
bc = Width of the cap in mm. It is equal to the length of the crankpin or 
big end bearing (lc), and 
σb = Allowable bending stress for the material of the cap in MPa. 
We know that section modulus for the cap, 
b (t c )2 
Z C =
c 
6 
M 
F   x 
6 
F   x 
C 
∴  Bending stress, 
σ   = 
 
I 
 
I
ZC 
6 
b (t ) 2 
b(t )
2
b
c 
c 
c 
c
From this expression, the value of tc is obtained. 
 
Note: The design of connecting rod should be checked for whipping stress (i.e. bending stress due to inertia 
force on the connecting rod). 
 
Example 32.3. Design a connecting rod for an I.C. engine running at 1800 r.p.m. and 
developing a maximum pressure of 3.15 N/mm2. The diameter of the piston is 100 mm ; mass of 
the reciprocating parts per cylinder 2.25 kg; length of connecting rod 380 mm; stroke of piston 
190 mm and compression ratio 6 : 1. Take a factor of safety of 6 for the design. Take length to 
diameter ratio for big end bearing as 1.3 and small end bearing as 2 and the corresponding 
bearing pressures as 10 N/mm2 and 15 N/mm2. The density of material of the rod may be taken as 
8000 kg/m3 and the allowable stress in the bolts as 60 N/mm2 and in cap as 80 N/mm2. The rod is 
to be of I-section for which you can choose your own proportions. 
 
Draw a neat dimensioned sketch showing provision for lubrication. Use Rankine formula for 
which the numerator constant may be taken as 320 N/mm2 and the denominator constant 1 / 7500. 
 
* 
We know that the maximum bending moment for a simply or freely supported beam with a uniformly 
distributed load of FI over a length x between the supports (In this case, x is the distance between the cap bolt 
centres) is FI  x
 . When the load FI is assumed to act at the centre of the freely supported beam, then  
 
8  
the maximum bending moment is FI  x . Thus the maximum bending moment in between these two bending 
4 
FI  x 
FI  x FI  x 
moments 
i.e. 
8 
and 
4 
is 
6 
.
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
1156 „ A Textbook of Machine Design 
 
Solution. Given : N = 1800 r.p.m. ; p = 3.15 N/mm2 ; D = 100 mm ; mR = 2.25 kg ; l = 380 
mm = 0.38 m ; Stroke = 190 mm ; *Compression ratio = 6 : 1 ; F. S. = 6. 
 
The connecting rod is designed as 
discussed below : 
 
1. Dimension of I- section of the connecting rod 
 
Let us consider an I-section of the 
connecting rod, as shown in Fig. 32.14 (a), with 
the following proportions : 
 
Flange and web thickness of the section = t 
 
Width of the section,  B = 4t 
and depth or height of the section, 
H = 5t 
Fig. 32.14 
First of all, let us find whether the section 
chosen is satisfactory or not. 
 
We have already discussed that the connecting rod is considered like both ends hinged for 
buckling about X-axis and both ends fixed for buckling about Y-axis. The connecting rod should 
be equally strong in buckling about both the axes. We know that in order to have a connecting rod 
equally strong about both the axes, 
I
xx = 4
 I
yy 
 
where 
Ixx = Moment of inertia of the section about X-axis, and 
Iyy = Moment of inertia of the section about Y-axis. 
In actual practice, Ixx is kept slightly less than 4 Iyy. It is usually taken between 3 and 3.5 and 
the connecting rod is designed for buckling about X-axis. 
 
Now, for the section as shown in Fig. 32.14 (a), area of the section, 
 
A = 2 (4 t × t ) + 3t × t = 11 t2 
I 
= 1 4 t (5t )3
− 3 t  (3t )3  419 t4 
xx 
12 
12 
and 
I 
= 2  1  t(4t)3  
1 
 3t  t3 131 t4 
yy 
12
12 
12 
∴ 
I
xx = 419  12 
 3.2 
I
 yy 
131 
12 
Since 
I
xx 
 3.2, therefore the section chosen in quite satisfactory. 
I
 yy 
 
Now let us find the dimensions of this I-section. Since the connecting rod is designed by 
taking the force on the connecting rod (FC) equal to the maximum force on the piston (FL) due to 
gas pressure, therefore, 
π D 2 
π(100) 2
FC  =  FL   
4   p  
 3.15   24 740 N 
4 
 
We know that the connecting rod is designed for buckling about X-axis (i.e. in the plane of 
motion of the connecting rod) assuming both ends hinged. Since a factor of safety is given as 6, 
therefore the buckling load, 
 
WB  = FC × F. S. = 24 740 × 6 = 148 440 N 
 
* 
Superfluous data  
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We know that radius of gyration of the section about X-axis, 
kxx = 
I
 xx 
 
419 t 4 
 
1 
  1 .78 t 
A 
12 
11 t 2 
Length of crank, 
r= Stroke of piston  
190  95 mm 
Length of the connecting rod, 
2
2 
l= 380 mm 
...(Given)
∴ Equivalent length of the connecting rod for both ends hinged, 
L = l = 380 mm 
Now according to Rankine’s formula, we know that buckling load (WB), 
148 440 =
σc .A 
320  11 t2 
L 
2 
1 
380  2 
1  a 
1  7500
k xx 
1.78 t 
... (It is given that σc = 320 MPa or N/mm2 and a = 1 / 7500)
148 440  11 t 2 
11 t4 
320 
1 
6.1 
t2 
 6.1 
t2
464 (t2 + 6.1) = 11 t4 
or 
t 4 – 42.2 t 2 – 257.3 = 0 
∴ 
2
= 
42.2  
(42.2) 2 
  4   257.3 
42.2   53 
= 47.6 
t 
2 
2 
... (Taking +ve sign)
or 
t = 6.9 say 7 mm 
Thus, the dimensions of I-section of the connecting rod are : 
Thickness of flange and web of the section 
= t = 7 mm Ans. 
Width of the section,   B = 4 t = 4 × 7 = 28 mm Ans. 
and depth or height of the section, 
H  = 5 t = 5 × 7 = 35 mm Ans. 
 
Piston and connecting rod. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
  
These dimensions are at the middle of the connecting rod. The width (B) is kept constant through-
out the length of the rod, but the depth (H) varies. The depth near the big end or crank end is kept as 
1.1H to 1.25H and the depth near the small end or piston end is kept as 0.75H to 0.9H. Let us take 
 
Depth near the big end, 
 
H1 = 1.2H = 1.2 × 35 = 42 mm 
and depth near the small end, 
 
H2 = 0.85H = 0.85 × 35 = 29.75 say 30 mm 
∴ Dimensions of the section near the big end 
 
= 42 mm × 28 mm 
Ans. and dimensions of the section near the small end 
 
= 30 mm × 28 mm Ans. 
 
Since the connecting rod is manufactured by forging, therefore the sharp corners of I-section 
are rounded off, as shown in Fig. 32.14 (b), for easy removal of the section from the dies. 
 
2. Dimensions of the crankpin or the big end bearing and piston pin or small end bearing 
 
Let 
dc= Diameter of the crankpin or big end bearing, 
lc = length of the crankpin or big end bearing = 1.3 dc 
...(Given) 
p bc = Bearing pressure = 10 N/mm2 
...(Given) 
We know that load on the crankpin or big end bearing 
 
= Projected area × Bearing pressure  
= dc .lc . pbc = dc × 1.3 dc × 10 = 13 (dc)2  
 
Since the crankpin or the big end bearing is designed for the maximum gas force (FL), 
therefore, equating the load on the crankpin or big end bearing to the maximum gas force, i.e. 
13 (d )2 = F L = 24 740 N 
∴ 
c 
(d c )
2 = 24 740 / 13 = 1903  or  d c = 43.6 say 44 mm Ans. 
and 
l
c = 1.3 dc = 1.3 × 44 = 57.2 say 58 mm Ans. 
 
The big end has removable precision bearing shells of brass or bronze or steel with a thin 
lining (1mm or less) of bearing metal such as babbit. 
Again, let 
dp = Diameter of the piston pin or small end bearing, 
lp = Length of the piston pin or small end bearing = 2dp 
...(Given)
p bp = Bearing pressure = 15 N/mm2 
..(Given)
We know that the load on the piston pin or small end bearing 
 
= Project area × Bearing pressure  
= dp . lp . pbp = dp × 2 dp × 15 = 30 (dp)2  
 
Since the piston pin or the small end bearing is designed for the maximum gas force (FL), 
therefore, equating the load on the piston pin or the small end bearing to the maximum gas force, 
 
i.e. 
30 (d )2 = 24 740 N 
∴ 
p 
(d )2 = 24 740 / 30 = 825  or  d p = 28.7 say 29 mm Ans. 
p 
and 
l
p = 2 dp = 2 × 29 = 58 mm Ans. 
The small end bearing is usually a phosphor bronze bush of about 3 mm thickness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
3. Size of bolts for securing the big end cap 
Let 
d
cb= Core diameter of the bolts, 
σt = Allowable tensile stress for the material of the bolts 
= 60 N/mm2 
...(Given)
and 
nb= Number of bolts. Generally two bolts are used. 
We know that force on the bolts 
= π ( d 
cb 
) 
2 σ 
t  n 
  π ( d 
cb 
) 2 60  2  94.26 ( d 
cb 
)2 
4 
b 
4 
 
The bolts and the big end cap are subjected to tensile force which corresponds to the inertia 
force of the reciprocating parts at the top dead centre on the exhaust stroke. We know that inertia 
force of the reciprocating parts, 
 
cos 2θ
FI = mR . ω2 . r  cos θ  
l / r 
We also know that at top dead centre on the exhaust stroke, θ = 0. 
 
2 
r 
2 π 1800 2 
0.095
∴ 
FI  = mR . ω . r 1 
 2.25 
60 
0.095 1 
 0.38
N 
l 
= 9490 N 
 
Equating the inertia force to the force on the bolts, we have 
9490 = 94.26 (d cb )2 or (d cb )2 = 9490 / 94.26 = 100.7 
∴ 
dcb  = 10.03 mm 
and nominal diameter of the bolt, d
cb 
10.03 
db  
 0.84 
 11.94 
0.84
4. Thickness of the big end cap 
say 12 mm Ans. 
Let 
tc = Thickness of the big end cap, 
bc = Width of the big end cap. It is 
taken equal to the length of the 
crankpin or big end bearing (lc) 
= 58 mm (calculated above) 
σb = Allowable bending stress for the 
material of the cap 
= 80 N/mm2 
...(Given) 
 
The big end cap is designed as a beam freely 
supported at the cap bolt centres and loaded by the 
inertia force at the top dead centre on the exhaust stroke 
(i.e. FI when θ = 0). Since the load is assumed to act in 
between the uniformly distributed load and the centrally 
concentrated 
load, 
therefore, 
maximum bending 
moment is taken as 
MC  = F
I  x 
6 
where 
x = Distance between the bolt centres 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
1160 „ A Textbook of Machine Design 
 
= Dia. of crank pin or big end bearing + 2 × Thickness of bearing 
liner + Nominal dia. of bolt + Clearance  
 
= (dc + 2 × 3 + db + 3) mm = 44 + 6 + 12 + 3 = 65 
mm ∴ Maximum bending moment acting on the cap,  
 
MC  = 
FI  x 
 
9490  65 
 102 810 N-mm 
6 
6 
Section modulus for the cap 
ZC  = b c ( t c ) 2  58( tc ) 2 
  9 .7 ( tc ) 2 
6 
6 
We know that bending stress ( σb ), 
80  
M
C  102 810  10 600 
9.7 (t c ) 2 
Z
C 
(tc )2 
∴ 
(t )2  = 10 600 / 80 = 132.5 
or  t = 11.5 mm Ans. 
c 
c 
 
Let us now check the design for the induced bending stress due to inertia bending forces on 
the connecting rod (i.e. whipping stress). 
 
We know that mass of the connecting rod per metre length, 
 
m1 = Volume × density = Area × length × density 
= A × l × ρ   = 11t2 × l × ρ 
...(Q A = 11t2)
= 11(0.007)2 (0.38) 8000 = 1.64 kg 
...[Q ρ  = 8 000 kg /m3 (given)]
∴ Maximum bending moment, 
M 
= m . ω2 . r × l 
= m . ω2 . r × l2 
...(Q m = m · l)
max
9 3
1 
9 3
1 
2π  1800 2 
(0.38)2
 51.3
= 1.64 
(0.095) 
N-m 
60 
9 3 
= 51 300 N-mm 
 
I
xx 
419 t4 
 
2 
  13.97 t 
3 
3
3 
and  section modulus, 
Z
xx
=13.97 × 7
= 4792 mm 
5 t / 2 
12
5 t 
∴ Maximum bending stress (induced ) due to inertia bending forces or whipping stress, 
σ 
 
M
max 
51 300  10.7 N / mm2 
b ( max)
Z
xx 
4792 
 
Since the maximum bending stress induced is less than the allowable bending stress of 80 
N/mm2, therefore the design is safe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT III  DESIGN OF CRANKSHAFT  
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 Balancing of I.C. engines 
Engine balance refers to those factors in the design, production, engine 
tuning, maintenance and the operation of an engine that benefit from 
being balanced. Major considerations are: 
 Balancing of structural and operational elements within an engine 
 Longevity and performance 
 Power and efficiency 
 Performance and weight/size/cost 
 Environmental cost and utility 
 Noise/vibration and performance 
This article is currently limited to structural and operational balance within 
an engine in general, and balancing of piston engine components in 
particular. 
Piston engine balancing is a complicated subject that covers many areas in 
the design, production, tuning and operation. The engine considered to be 
well balanced in a particular usage may produce unacceptable level of 
vibration in another usage for the difference in driven mass and mounting 
method, and slight variations in resonant frequencies of the environment 
and engine parts could be big factors in throwing a smooth operation off 
balance. In addition to the vast areas that need to be covered and the 
delicate nature, terminologies commonly used to describe engine balance 
are often incorrectly understood and/or poorly defined not only in casual 
discussions but also in many articles in respected publications. 
Internal combustion piston engines, by definition, are converter devices to 
transform energy in intermittent combustion into energy in mechanical 
motion. A slider-crank mechanismis used in creating a chemical reaction on 
fuel with air (compression and ignition), and converting the energy into 
rotation (expansion). The intermittent energy source combined with the 
nature of this mechanism make the engine naturally vibration-prone. Multi-
cylinder configuration and many of the engine design elements are 
reflections of the effort to reduce vibrations through the act of balancing. 
This article is organized in six sections: 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 "Items to be balanced" 
lists the balancing elements to establish the basics on the causes of 
imbalance. 
 "Types of vibration" 
lists different kinds of vibration as the effects of imbalance. 
 "Primary balance" 
discusses the term "Primary balance". 
 "Secondary balance" 
explains what Secondary balance is, and how the confusing 
terminologies 'Primary' and 'Secondary' came into popular use. 
 "Inherent balance" 
goes into engine balance discussions on various multi-cylinder 
configurations. 
 "Steam locomotives" 
is an introduction to the balancing of 2-cylinder locomotives and 
includes the wheel hammer effect unique to steam locomotives. 
 
There are many factors that can contribute to engine imbalance, and there 
are many ways to categorize them. The following categories will be used for 
the purposes of this discussion. In the category descriptions, 'Phase' refers 
to the timing on the rotation of crankshaft, 'Plane' refers to the location on 
the crankshaft rotating axis, and 'CG' refers to the center of gravity. 
 Mechanical 
 Static Balance - Static balance refers to the balancing of weight and 
the location of CG on moving parts. 
1. Reciprocating mass - e.g. Piston and connecting rod weight and CG 
uniformity. 
2. Rotating mass - e.g. Crank web weight uniformity and flywheel 
eccentricity (or lack there of) 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 Dynamic Balance - In order for a mass to start moving from rest 
or change direction, it needs to be accelerated. A force is 
required to accelerate a mass. According to Newton's 3rd law of 
motion, there will be an counter force in the opposite direction 
of equal size. Dynamic balance refers to the balancing of these 
forces and forces due to friction. 
All accelerations of a mass can be divided into two components in 
opposite directions. For example, in order for a piston in a single 
cylinder engine to be accelerated upward, something must receive 
(support) the downward force, and it is usually the mass of the entire 
engine that moves downward a bit as there is no counter-moving 
piston. This means one cause of engine vibration usually appears in 
two opposing directions. Often the movement or deflection in one 
direction appears on a moving mass, and the other direction appears 
on the entire engine, but sometimes both sides appear on moving 
parts, e.g. a torsional vibration in a crankshaft, or a push-pull cyclic 
stress in a chain or connecting rod. In other cases, one side is a 
deflection of a static part, the energy in which is converted into heat 
and dissipated into the coolant. 
 Reciprocating mass - Piston mass needs to be accelerated and 
decelerated, resisting a smooth rotation of a crankshaft. In addition 
to the up-down movement of a piston, a connecting rod big end 
swings left and right and up and down while it rotates. In order to 
simplify the motion of a crank slider mechanism, the connecting 
rod/piston assembly is generally divided into two mass groups, a 
reciprocating mass, and a rotating mass. The big end of the rod is 
generally said to be rotating while the small end is said to be 
reciprocating. In truth, however, both ends both reciprocate and 
rotate. 
3. Phase balance - e.g. Pistons on 60 or 90° V6 without an offset 
crankshaft reciprocate with unevenly spaced phases in a crank 
rotation 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
4. Plane balance - e.g. Boxer Twin pistons travel on two different 
rotational planes of the crankshaft, which creates forces to rock the 
engine on Z-axis[note 1] 
 Rotating mass 
5. Phase balance - e.g. Imbalance in camshaft rotating mass can 
generate a vibration with a frequency equal to once in 2 crank 
rotations in a 4 cycle engine 
6. Plane balance - e.g. Boxer Twin crankshaft without counterweights 
rocks the engine on Z-axis[1] 
7. Torsional balance - If the rigidity of crank throws on an inline 4 
cylinder engine is uniform, the crank throw farthest from the clutch 
surface (usually called cylinder #1) normally shows the biggest 
torsional deflection. It is usually impossible to make these deflections 
uniform across multiple cylinders except on a radial engine. 
SeeTorsional vibration 
 8. Static mass - A single cylinder 10 HP engine weighing a ton is 
very smooth, because the forces that comprise its imbalance in 
operation must move a large mass to create a vibration. 
As power to weight ratio is important in the design of an engine, 
the weight of a crankcase, cylinder block, cylinder head, etc. (i.e. 
static mass) are usually made as light as possible within the 
limitations of strength, cost and safety margin, and are often 
excluded in the consideration of engine balance. 
However, most vibrations of an engine are small movements of the 
engine itself, and are thus determined by the engine weight, rigidity, 
location of CG, and how much its mass is concentrated around the CG. 
These are crucial factors in engine dynamic balance, which is defined 
for the whole engine in reciprocal and rotational movements as well 
as in bending and twisting deflections on the X, Y and Z axis. All of 
these are important factors in the design of engine mounts and the 
rigidity of static parts. 
It is important to recognize that some moving masses must be 
considered a part of static mass depending on the kind of dynamic 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
balance under consideration (e.g. camshaft weight in analyzing the Y-
axis[note 1] rotational vibration of an engine). 
 Friction 
9. Slide resistance balance - A piston slides in a cylinder with friction. A 
ball in a ball bearing also slides as the diameter of inner and outer 
laces are different and the distance of circumference differs from the 
inside and out. When a ball bearing is used as the main bearing on a 
crankshaft (which is rarely the case), eccentricity of the cage (lace) 
normally create phase imbalance in slide friction. Friction forces for 
shell bearings (the most common type of bearings) are dependent 
upon diameter and width, which determine bearing surface area. This 
needs to be balanced for the pressure and the rotational speed of the 
load. Different main bearing sizes on a crankshaft create plane 
imbalance in slide friction. 
10. Rolling resistance balance - e.g. A ball in a ball bearing generates 
friction while rolling in it's cage 
SIGNIFICANCE OF FIRING ORDER 
The firing order is the sequence of power delivery of each cylinder in 
a multi-cylinder reciprocating engine. 
This is achieved by sparking of the spark plugs in a gasoline engine 
in the correct order, or by the sequence of fuel injection in a Diesel 
engine. When designing an engine, choosing an appropriate firing 
order is critical to minimizing vibration, to improve engine balance and 
achieving smooth running, for long engine fatigue life and user 
comfort, and heavily influences crankshaft design. 
Cylinder numbering and firing orders for various engine layouts[edit] 
In a straight engine the spark plugs (and cylinders) are numbered, 
starting with #1, usually from the front of the engine to the rear. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
1-3-5-2-4 would be the firing order for this 5-cylinder radial engine. 
In a radial engine the cylinders are numbered around the circle, with 
the #1 cylinder at the top. There are always an odd number of 
cylinders in each bank, as this allows for a constant alternate cylinder 
firing order: for example, with a single bank of 7 cylinders, the order 
would be 1-3-5-7-2-4-6. Moreover, unless there is an odd number of 
cylinders, the ring cam around the nose of the engine would be 
unable to provide the inlet valve open - exhaust valve open sequence 
required by the four-stroke cycle. 
 
The cylinder numbering scheme used by some manufacturers on 
their V engines is based on "folding" the engine into an inline type. 
In a V engine, cylinder numbering varies among manufacturers. 
Generally speaking, the most forward cylinder is numbered 1, but 
some manufacturers will then continue numbering along that bank 
first (so that side of the engine would be 1-2-3-4, and the opposite 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
bank would be 5-6-7-8) while others will number the cylinders from 
front to back along the crankshaft, so one bank would be 1-3-5-7 and 
the other bank would be 2-4-6-8. (In this example, a V8 is assumed). 
To further complicate matters, manufacturers may not have used the 
same system for all of their engines. It is important to check the 
numbering system used before comparing firing orders, because the 
order will vary significantly with crankshaft design (see crossplane). 
As an example, the Chevrolet Small-Block engine has cylinders 1-3-
5-7 on the left hand side of the car, and 2-4-6-8 on the other side, and 
uses a firing order of 1-8-4-3-6-5-7-2.[1] Note that the order alternates 
irregularly between the left and right banks; this is what causes the 
'burbling' sound of this type of engine.[2] 
In most Audi and Ford V8 engines cylinders 1-2-3-4 are on the right 
hand side of the car, with 5-6-7-8 are on the left. 
This means that Chevy Generation 1 Small Block V8 engines and 
Ford 302 V8s (5.8L, 5.0L, 7.5L) have an identical firing pattern 
despite having a different firing order. 
Likewise, the firing pattern is the same for Chevrolet & Chrysler V8 
engines with a firing order of 1-8-4-3-6-5-7-2, and for Ford's V8 
engines with a firing order of 1-5-4-2-6-3-7-8. 
An exception is the Ford Flathead V8 where the number 1 cylinder is 
on the right front of the engine (same as other Ford V8's) but this 
cylinder is not the front cylinder of the engine. In this case number 5 
is the front cylinder. A similar situation exists with the Pontiac V8's 
455 etc. where the cylinders are numbered like a Chevrolet V8 but 
the right side bank is in front(like a Ford), this puts cylinder number 2 
in front of number 1. 
 
 
 
Crankshaft 
A crankshaft (i.e. a shaft with a crank) is used to convert reciprocating 
motion of the piston into 
rotatory motion or vice versa. The crankshaft consists of the shaft parts 
which revolve in the main 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
bearings, the crankpins to which the big ends of the connecting rod are 
connected, the crank arms or 
webs (also called cheeks) which connect the crankpins and the shaft parts. 
The crankshaft, depending 
upon the position of crank, may be divided into the following two types : 
1. Side crankshaft or overhung crankshaft, as shown in Fig. 32.15 (a),  
2. And centre crankshaft 
 
  
Design Procedure for Crankshaft 
The following procedure may be adopted for designing a crankshaft. 
1. First of all, find the magnitude of the various loads on the crankshaft. 
2. Determine the distances between the supports and their position with 
respect to the loads. 
3. For the sake of simplicity and also for safety, the shaft is considered to be 
supported at the 
centres of the bearings and all the forces and reactions to be acting at these 
points. The distances 
between the supports depend on the length of the bearings, which in turn 
depend on the diameter of 
the shaft because of the allowable bearing pressures. 
4. The thickness of the cheeks or webs is assumed to be from 0.4 ds to 0.6 
ds, where ds is the 
diameter of the shaft. It may also be taken as 0.22D to 0.32 D, where D is the 
bore of cylinder in mm. 
5. Now calculate the distances between the supports. 
6. Assuming the allowable bending and shear stresses, determine the main 
dimensions of the 
crankshaft. 
Notes: 1. The crankshaft must be designed or checked for at least two crank 
positions. Firstly, when the crankshaft 
is subjected to maximum bending moment and secondly when the crankshaft 
is subjected to maximum 
twisting moment or torque. 
2. The additional moment due to weight of flywheel, belt tension and other 
forces must be considered. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
3. It is assumed that the effect of bending moment does not exceed two 
bearings between which a force is 
considered. 
32.20 Design of Centre Crankshaft 
We shall design the centre crankshaft by considering the two crank 
possitions, i.e. when the 
crank is at dead centre (or when the crankshaft is subjected to maximum 
bending moment) and when 
the crank is at angle at which the twisting moment is maximum. These two 
cases are discussed in 
detail as below : 
1. When the crank is at dead centre. At this position of the crank, the 
maximum gas pressure on 
the piston will transmit maximum force on the crankpin in the plane of the 
crank causing only bending 
of the shaft. The crankpin as well as ends of the crankshaft will be only 
subjected to bending moment. 
Thus, when the crank is at the dead centre, the bending moment on the shaft 
is maximum and the 
twisting moment is zero. 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
The value of (c)max should be within safe limits. If it exceeds the safe 
value, then the dimension 
w may be increased because it does not affect other dimensions. 
(e) Design of left hand crank web 
Since the left hand crank web is not stressed to the extent as the right hand 
crank web, therefore, 
the dimensions for the left hand crank web may be made same as for right 
hand crank web. 
( f ) Design of crankshaft bearings 
The bearing 2 is the most heavily loaded and should be checked for the safe 
bearing pressure. 
We know that the total reaction at the bearing 2, 
 
Design a plain carbon steel centre crankshaft for a single acting four stroke 
single cylinder engine for the following data: 
Bore = 400 mm ; Stroke = 600 mm ; Engine speed = 200 r.p.m. ; Mean 
effective pressure = 0.5 
N/mm2; Maximum combustion pressure = 2.5 N/mm2; Weight of flywheel 
used as a pulley = 50 kN; 
Total belt pull = 6.5 kN. 
When the crank has turned through 35° from the top dead centre, the 
pressure on the piston is 
1N/mm2 and the torque on the crank is maximum. The ratio of the 
connecting rod length to the crank 
radius is 5. Assume any other data required for the design. 
Solution. Given : D = 400 mm ; L = 600 mm or r = 300 mm ; pm = 0.5 
N/mm2 ; p = 2.5 N/mm2 ; 
W = 50 kN ; T1 + T2 = 6.5 kN ; = 35° ; p= 1N/mm2 ; l / r = 5 
 
We shall design the crankshaft for the two positions of the crank, i.e. firstly 
when the crank is at 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
the dead centre ; and secondly when the crank is at an angle of maximum 
twisting moment. 
1. Design of the crankshaft when the crank is at the dead centre  
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
UNIT IV  
 DESIGN OF FLYWHEELS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
A flywheel used in machines serves as a reservoir which stores energy 
during the period when the supply of energy is more than the requirement 
and releases it during the period when the requirement of energy is more 
than supply. In case of steam engines, internal combustion engines, 
reciprocating compressors and pumps, the energy is developed during one 
stroke and the engine is to run for the whole cycle on the energy produced 
during this one stroke. For example, in I.C. engines, the energy is developed 
only during power stroke which is much more than the engine load, and no 
energy is being developed during suction, compression and exhaust strokes 
in case of four stroke engines and during compression in case of two stroke 
engines. The excess energy developed during power stroke is absorbed by 
the flywheel and releases it to the crankshaft during other strokes in which 
no energy is developed, thus rotating the crankshaft at a uniform speed. A 
little consideration will show that when the flywheel absorbs energy, its 
speed increases and when it releases, the speed decreases. Hence a flywheel 
does not maintain a constant speed, it simply reduces the fluctuation of 
speed. In machines where the operation is intermittent like punching 
machines, shearing machines, riveting machines, crushers etc., the flywheel 
stores energy from the power source during the greater portion of the 
operating cycle and gives it up during a small period of the cycle. Thus the 
energy from the power source to the machines is supplied practically at a 
constant rate throughout the operation. 
 
Coefficient of Fluctuation of Speed 
The difference between the maximum and minimum speeds during a cycle is 
called the maximum fluctuation of speed. The ratio of the maximum 
fluctuation of speed to the mean speed is called coefficient of fluctuation of 
speed. 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fluctuation of Energy 
The fluctuation of energy may be determined by the turning moment 
diagram for one complete cycle of operation. Consider a turning moment 
diagram for a single cylinder double acting steam 
engine. The vertical ordinate represents the turning moment and the 
horizontal ordinate (abscissa) represents the crank angle. 
A little consideration will show that the turning moment is zero when the 
crank angle is zero. It rises to a maximum value when crank angle reaches 
90º and it is again zero when crank angle is 180º. This is shown by the curve 
abc in Fig and it represents the turning moment diagram for outstroke. 
The curve cde is the turning moment diagram for instroke and is somewhat 
similar to the curve abc. Since the work done is the product of the turning 
moment and the angle turned, therefore the 
area of the turning moment diagram represents the work done per revolution. 
In actual practice, the engine is assumed to work against the mean resisting 
torque, as shown by a horizontal line AF. The 
height of the ordinate aA represents the mean height of the turning moment 
diagram. Since it is assumed that the work done by the turning moment per 
revolution is equal to the work done against the mean resisting torque, 
therefore the area of the rectangle aA Fe is proportional to the work done 
against the mean resisting torque. 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
We see in Fig, that the mean resisting torque line AF cuts the turning 
moment diagram at points B, C, D and E. When the crank moves from ‘a’ to 
‘p’ the work done by the engine is equal to the area aBp, whereas the energy 
required is represented by the area aABp. In other words, the engine 
has done less work (equal to the area aAB) than the requirement. This 
amount of energy is taken from the flywheel and hence the speed of the 
flywheel decreases. Now the crank moves from p to q, the 
work done by the engine is equal to the area pBbCq, whereas the 
requirement of energy is represented by the area pBCq. Therefore the engine 
has done more work than the requirement. This excess work 
(equal to the area BbC) is stored in the flywheel and hence the speed of the 
flywheel increases while the crank moves from p to q. 
Similarly when the crank moves from q to r, more work is taken from the 
engine than is developed. This loss of work is represented by the area CcD. 
To supply this loss, the flywheel gives up some of 
its energy and thus the speed decreases while the crank moves from q to r. 
As the crank moves from r to s, excess energy is again developed given by 
the area DdE and the speed again increases. As the 
piston moves from s to e, again there is a loss of work and the speed 
decreases. The variations of energy above and below the mean resisting 
torque line are called fluctuation of energy. The areas BbC, CcD, DdE etc. 
represent fluctuations of energy. 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Maximum Fluctuation of Energy 
A turning moment diagram for a multi-cylinder engine is shown by a wavy 
curve in Fig. 
The horizontal line AG represents the mean torque line. Let a1, a3, a5 be the 
areas above the mean torque line and a2, a4 and a6 be the areas below the 
mean torque line. These areas represent some quantity of energy which is 
either added or subtracted from the energy of the moving parts of the engine. 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
Coefficient of Fluctuation of Energy 
It is defined as the ratio of the maximum fluctuation of energy to the work 
done per cycle. It is usually denoted by CE. Mathematically, coefficient of 
fluctuation of energy 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Energy Stored in a Flywheel 
A flywheel is shown in Fig. We have already discussed that when a flywheel 
absorbs energy its speed increases and when it gives up energy its speed 
decreases. 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
The turning moment diagram for a petrol engine is drawn to the following 
scales: 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
The intercepted areas between the output torque curve and the mean 
resistance line of a turning moment diagram for a multicylinder engine, 
taken in order from one end are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
UNIT V  
 DESIGN OF VALVES AND 
VALVE TRAIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design aspects of intake & exhaust manifolds 
 
The purpose of the exhaust and inlet processes is to remove the burned gases at the end of the power stroke 
and admit fresh charge for the next cycle. Indicated power of an ICE at a given speed is proportional to the 
mass flow rate of air. Inducting the maximum air mass and retaining the mass within the cylinder is the 
primary goal of the gas exchange processes in engines. Engine gas exchange processes are characterized by 
volumetric efficiency and it depends on the design of engine subsystems such as manifolds, valves, and ports, 
as well as engine operating conditions. Supercharging and turbo-charging are used to increase air flow into 
engine cylinder, and hence power density 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
In SI engine, the intake system typically consists of an air filter, a carburettor and throttle or fuel injector and 
throttle or throttle with individual fuel injectors in each intake port and intake manifold. During the induction 
process, pressure losses occur as the mixture passes through or by each of these components. The pressure 
drop depends on engine speed, the flow resistance of the elements in the system, the cross-sectional area 
through which the fresh charge moves, and the charge density. In a CI engine intake system, the carburettor 
or EFI system and the throttle plate are absent. The exhaust system typically consists of an exhaust manifold, 
exhaust pipe, often a catalytic converter for emission control, and a muffler or silencer. 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
Valve Gear Mechanism 
The valve gear mechanism of an I.C. engine consists of those parts which 
actuate the inlet and exhaust valves at the required time with respect to the 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
position of piston and crankshaft.Fig shows the valve gear arrangement for 
vertical engines. The main components of the mechanism are valves, rocker 
arm, * valve springs, **push rod, ***cam and camshaft 
 
The fuel is admitted to the engine by the inlet valve and the burnt gases are 
escaped through the exhaust valve. In vertical engines, the cam moving on 
the rotating camshaft pushes the cam follower and push rod upwards, 
thereby transmitting the cam action to rocker arm. The camshaft is rotated by 
the toothed belt from the crankshaft. The rocker arm is pivoted at its centre 
by a fulcrum pin. When one end of the rocker arm is pushed up by the push 
rod, the other end moves downward. This pushes down the valve stem 
causing the valve to move down, thereby opening the port. When the cam 
follower moves over the circular portion of cam, the pushing action of the 
rocker arm on the valve is released and the valve returns to its seat and 
closes it by the action of the valve spring. In some of the modern engines, 
the camshaft is located at cylinder head level. In such cases, the push rod is 
eliminated and the roller type cam follower is made part of the rocker arm 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Design a rocker arm, and its bearings, tappet, roller and valve spring for the 
exhaust valve of a four stroke I.C. engine from the following data: 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
 
 
 
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
Fatima Michael College of Engineering & Technology
