Design of an active exhaust attenuating valve for internal
combustion engines.
R. Boonen, P. Sas
KULeuven, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Celestijnenlaan 300 B, B-3001, Heverlee, Belgium
e-mail: rene.boonen@mech.kuleuven.ac.be
Abstract
An active silencer to attenuate internal combustion engine exhaust noise is developed. The silencer consists of
an electrically controlled valve connected to a buffer volume. The pulsating ﬂow from the engine is buffered
in the volume and the valve resistance is continuously controlled such that only the mean ﬂow passes to the
atmosphere. This ﬂow is free of ﬂuctuations and consequently free of sound. The design of the active silencer
is carried out using electrical analog circuits. First, the interaction between the active silencer and the engine
will be studied using an analog circuit including the combustion engine and a linearized active silencer. Then, a
detailed valve model is built in a separate electrical analog circuit. It includes the electrical, the mechanical and
the ﬂow-dynamic properties of the actuator valve. The actuator valve concept is then simulated, from which
a prototype can be constructed. The active silencer has been tested on a cold engine simulator. This device
generates realistic exhaust noise with the associated gas ﬂow using compressed air. The silencer can attenuate
pulsations from engines at very low revolution speed, without passive elements preconnected between the
engine and the active silencer. This is not possible using loudspeaker based active silencers.
1
Introduction
The internal combustion engine has found its way into
a broad spectrum of applications, wherein transporta-
tion has far the largest share. The success of the in-
ternal combustion engine has also created problems
associated with it, such as air pollution and environ-
mental noise.
During the past decades, legislation has come for-
ward which stringently reduces air pollutants, green-
house gases and noise emission.
Today, the noise
emission limits are set to 74 dBA for cars and 80 dBA
for heavy vehicles [1]. For cars, the emission of CO2
is limited to 190 g/km (EU III-directive), and will
be further reduced to 170 g/km (EU IV) in 2003 and
140 g/km (EU V) in 2008. Although these directives
are not related at ﬁrst sight, they do have their impli-
cations on the exhaust system development. It will be
necessary to develop exhaust systems with minimum
back pressure to the engine, to maximize engine efﬁ-
ciency and this without loss of noise attenuation per-
formance. A way out to this problem is to develop
active exhaust systems.
Much research on active noise cancellation in
ducts is carried out in the recent years and numer-
ous patents have been generated. Loudspeaker sys-
tems are successfully applied and commercial avail-
able in ventilation channels [2]. Loudspeaker systems
are also developed for stationary diesel engines, for
example by Detroit Diesel Corporation [3] and the
KEBA AISTM-system. For cars, active loudspeaker
systems are developed for six or more cylinder en-
gines [4]. For four-cylinder engines, loudspeaker sys-
tems suffer from problems as the low sound generat-
ing efﬁciency and reliability in the extreme conditions
of an engine exhaust.
Applying a controllable valve in the exhaust duct
is a more robust concept. The restricting element of
the valve can be small and rigidly constructed. It can
be exposed to the exhaust gas directly.
The resistance of the valve is continuously vari-
able by applying an external signal. It is assumed that
the valve is purely resistive, it isn’t capable to store
energy from the gas ﬂow. As consequence of the gas
ﬂow, the valve generates a pressure drop over it. Ac-
tive noise cancellation is achieved, when the volume
velocity behind the valve is kept constant.
In ﬁgure 1, the ﬁrst graph demonstrates how the
sound pressure inﬂuences the ﬂuid ﬂow via the valve
resistance characteristic. The second graph demon-
strates how the opposite ﬂuctuating ﬂow is generated
from the mean pressure drop over the valve by vary-
33
Figure 1:
Basic principle using a valve to control
the ﬂow through a duct. The symbols in the ﬁgure
mean: Q0 is mean ﬂuid ﬂow, q is ﬂow ﬂuctuation,
p0 is mean pressure, ∆p is the pressure ﬂuctuation,
K is the valve constant which expresses the relation
between pressure and ﬂow, k is the variation on K.
ing the valve resistance. Superposition of both effects
results in a constant volume ﬂow, shown in the third
graph.
Based on this concept, a noise attenuating de-
vice is developed by LEA (University of Poitiers,
France) [5, 6], using a butterﬂy valve, and is tested
on an internal combustion engine test rig. The test
rig consists of an 1350 cm3 four cylinder car engine
equipped with an hydraulic brake. In the exhaust line
two passive mufﬂers are preconnected to the actuator
valve. As control strategy, a x-LMS feedforward and
a feedback control system are tested. In the feedfor-
ward case, the three ﬁrst harmonics are reduced by
20 to 30 dB. In the feedback case, the ﬁrst harmonic
is reduced by 20 dB, the second harmonic by 5 dB.
The research work presented in this paper aims to
develop an active exhaust silencer based on a valve
concept, capable to handle the acoustical power of the
pressure pulsation of the engine exhaust without the
requirement to install silencers prior to the active de-
vice. The generated back pressure must be low. After
the active device, a small passive silencer can be in-
stalled to attenuate the high frequency noise.
2
Development of the active si-
lencer
2.1
Principle
Theoretically, inserting an active valve in the ﬂow of
a volume velocity source, like a combustion engine,
has no effect if no capacitive elements are present be-
tween the source and the valve. The volume velocity
source forces a prescribed ﬂow through the exhaust
system, whatever the pressure becomes in it. Capac-
itive elements can be introduced using ducts or vol-
umes. When the valve is inserted in an exhaust duct
of an engine without additional capacitive elements,
a high back pressure will be generated or only a low
noise attenuation will result.
The most simple system able to control of a vol-
ume velocity source using a controlled valve is pre-
sented in ﬁgure 2. The engine acts as a volume veloc-
ity source. At the exhaust, a volume with capacity C
and a regulating valve with variable resistance R(t)
is connected. The translation of the physical system
results in the electrical equivalent circuit [7] shown in
ﬁgure 2 below. The impedance Z is the impedance of
the tail pipe and the open air radiator. The ﬂow from
the source will split over the capacitor C and the time
dependent resistor R(t). Now, the controller has to
vary the valve resistance during time, such that the
ﬂuctuating ﬂow through the resistance becomes zero.
Figure 2: The most simple scheme of an active con-
trol valve on an internal combustion engine, approxi-
mated as a volume velocity source.
The variation of the valve resistance is obtained
from the electrical equivalent circuit:
UB = 1
C
Z
ICd t = IR (R(t) + Z)
(1)
Differentiating (1) results in:
IC
1
C = d IR
d t R(t) + IR
d R(t)
d t
+ Z d IR
d t
(2)
Constant ﬂow through the valve opening implies:
d IR
d t = 0
(3)
The controller has to vary the valve resistance during
time according:
R(t) = R0 +
Z
1
C
IC
IR
d t
(4)
34
PROCEEDINGS OF ISMA2002 - VOLUME I
wherein R0 is the initial valve resistance. The same
result can be achieved by a controller which mini-
mizes the pressure UZ after the valve:
d UZ
d t
= Z d IR
d t = 0
(5)
This simple consideration has two important conse-
quences. First, by balancing the volume-valve com-
bination, it is always possible to control the ﬂow of
any volume velocity source. Second, the resistance
R0 can be chosen freely with the only restriction that
the resistance R(t) remains always positive. The re-
sistance R0 can be optimized to obtain minimum back
pressure to the engine, resulting in a higher engine ef-
ﬁciency.
2.2
Electrical equivalent model for the
engine and the silencer
The simple model, presented in ﬁgure 2, looks not
very realistic for an engine exhaust system, therefore
the model will be expanded. The volume velocity
source will be replaced by an engine model, and a
duct is connected between the engine and the active
silencer. A tail pipe is connected behind the silencer.
The resulting circuit is presented in ﬁgure 3.
The left part of the circuit is the engine model.
The four variable capacitors represent the four en-
gine cylinders, who’s volume varies sinusoidal be-
tween maximum and dead volume. The upper set of
switch-resistors represent the intake valves, the lower
set the exhaust valves. The switches are actuated in
the same sequence as the cam shaft operates the en-
gine valves. The four short transmission lines behind
the exhaust valve resistors represent the four exhaust
conduits between the cylinder ports and the exhaust
manifold junction. The intake side is connected to a
voltage source UB representing the atmospheric pres-
sure and equals 100 kV. The combustion is simulated
by charging the cylinder capacitor by a pulsing cur-
rent source parallel over the capacitor. The charge
time point corresponds to the ignition time point.
The right part represents the active exhaust sys-
tem. The silencer is connected to the engine via the
duct represented by the transmission line T. The ca-
pacitor C represents the buffer volume and the vari-
able resistor R(t) the control valve. The transmis-
sion line Tt represents the tail pipe and the resistor-
inductor combination Ra and La corresponds to the
spherical radiator impedance. In simulation, a collo-
cated feedback controller conducts the control valve
Figure 3:
Electrical analog circuit for an internal
combustion engine equipped with an active noise con-
trol valve.
resistance. This controller is only needed to deter-
mine the active silencer properties. In practice, other
control strategies must be applied to handle the time
delay between the valve action and its effect in the
error sensor.
In principle, the back pressure to the engine can be
set to any desired value by choosing the appropriate
buffer volume capacitor C. In practice, it will result in
a compromise between available space for the active
silencer and acceptable back pressure.
Figure 4: Simulated indicator diagram from the cir-
cuit presented in ﬁgure 3.
2.3
Simulation results
In the electrical circuit of ﬁgure 3, the engine param-
eters of a 2000 cm3 engine are introduced. The ducts
have a diameter of 60 mm. The duct between the en-
gine and the silencer is 500 mm long, the tail pipe
700 mm long. The back pressure is set to 10 kPa,
resulting in a buffer volume of 12 dm3. The initial
actuator valve resistance is set to 200 kΩ(1 Ω=
1 Pa s/m3). The feedback control gain is set to 108.
In ﬁgure 4, the simulated engine indicator diagram
ACTIVE NOISE CONTROL
35
Figure 5: Simulated tail pipe absolute pressure. The
controller starts at 0.2 s.
is presented. Actually, this diagram has no physical
signiﬁcance, it is an ”isothermal” simulation. Only
the pressure at the exhaust valve opening time point
must have its correct value, which is deterministic for
the exhaust noise. The exhaust pressure in the tail
pipe is displayed in ﬁgure 5. The controller is acti-
vated at 0.2 s. Activating the controller at 0.2 s does
not effect the gas ﬂow from the engine, as indicated
in ﬁgure 6. The engine behaves as a volume velocity
source. In ﬁgure 7, the absolute back pressure to the
engine is displayed. After the transient switching on
the controller, the back pressure returns to the preset-
ted value of 10 kPa.
Figure 6:
Simulated gas ﬂow through the exhaust
manifold.
2.4
Electrical analog model for the ac-
tuator valve.
The construction of the actuator valve is presented in
ﬁgure 8. The valve has a conical head and is driven
by a voice coil in a permanent magnetic circuit. The
Figure 7:
Simulated absolute back pressure to the
engine. The controller starts at 0.2 s.
valve has a monotonic increasing valve resistance in
terms of head displacement. This resistance is pre-
sented in ﬁgure 10. This is an advantage compared to
for example a butterﬂy valve, which has a sign rever-
sal in its resistance characteristic derivative in terms
of position angle.
Figure 8:
Scheme of the voice coil driven actuator
valve.
Figure 9:
Detailed electrical analog circuit for the
voice coil driven actuator valve presented in ﬁgure 10.
Figure 9 presents the electrical analog circuit of
the actuator valve presented in ﬁgure 8. This circuit
is typical for the construction of this valve. Another
construction, for instance a butterﬂy valve, would re-
sult in a totally different electrical analog circuit.
36
PROCEEDINGS OF ISMA2002 - VOLUME I
The left side of the circuit consists of the voice coil
electrical resistance R. The transformer Km trans-
forms the current into force by the voice coil in the
permanent magnetic circuit. The force acts on the
mass m of the moving valve body, i.e. the motor coil
and the valve head. The valve body is suspended by a
suspension spring k and is damped by the damper d.
The damper can be constructed as a short circuit coil
in the magnetic circuit. As mechanical ”voltage”, the
valve head velocity ˙x appears. The valve head ﬂow
resistance is dependent to the valve head displace-
ment, consequently, the velocity has to be integrated.
The integration is carried out by the controlled cur-
rent source g, which current is proportional with the
applied velocity. The integrated value appears as a
voltage over the capacitor with value 1. The volt-
age source xmax corresponds to the distance between
the zero position and the closed position of the valve.
The zero position is the position where the suspen-
sion spring exerts zero force. By determination of the
value xmax, the pretensioning of the suspension spring
can be taken into account. When the closing position
is reached, the switch sw closes and the integration
stops. The resistor of 1 M smoothes the current when
the switch is activated, but its value is sufﬁciently high
to not distort the integration. The pressure source b
uses the displacement x and the volume velocity Φ
measured in Vs to produce the pressure drop ∆p [8].
The resulting pressure exercises a force on the valve
head through the oriﬁce area S. This force is fed back
to the mechanical circuit through the gyrator 1/S.
2.5
Simulation results.
To simulate the valve, the buffer volume capacitor
has to be connected parallel over the input nodes at
the ﬂow-dynamic side. The engine as source will be
replaced by a volume velocity source, to save com-
putational effort. The volume velocity source is also
connected in parallel over the ﬂow input nodes. The
source generates the ﬂow corresponding to the engine
exhaust, which is presented in ﬁgure 6. At the electri-
cal nodes, a proportional feedback controller is con-
nected. This controller generates an electrical current
proportional to the alternating part of the ﬂow Vs as
error signal.
The values of the components of the actuator valve
are: R = 4 Ω, Km = 16 N/A, m = 96 · 10−3 kg, k =
12 · 103 N/m, d = 125 Ns/m and S = 916 · 10−6 m2.
Figure 11 presents the simulated gas ﬂow through
the tail pipe. The controller is activated at 2 s. The
non-linear valve resistance does not inﬂuence the at-
Figure 10:
Actuator valve ﬂow resistance in terms
of valve head displacement for a conical head valve.
The valve is closed at 10 mm.
Figure 11:
Attenuation of the gas ﬂow pulsation
through the tail pipe. The controller starts at 2 s.
tenuation performance signiﬁcantly. The valve head
displacement is presented in ﬁgure 12. The distance
between the head and the oriﬁce is about 1.5 mm and
the stroke in control amounts 0.4mm. These are valu-
able data to design the voice coil and the magnet.
The current through the voice coil is displayed in
ﬁgure 13. The associated electrical power consump-
tion of the valve amounts about 78 W to compensate
the back pressure. The attenuation of the sound it-
self requires only 5 W power. If necessary, the con-
stant force as consequence of the DC-current of 4.4 A
can be compensated by placing a pretensioned spring
parallel to the motor. This reduces the 78 W power
consumption to theoretically zero.
ACTIVE NOISE CONTROL
37
Figure 12:
Actuator valve head displacement. The
controller starts at 2 s.
Figure 13: Current through the actuator valve voice
coil. The controller starts at 2 s.
3
Experimental results
3.1
Cold engine simulator
The development of the active silencer has been car-
ried out on a cold engine simulator. This device pro-
duces realistic exhaust noise using compressed air
and permits to carry out acoustical and ﬂuid-dynamic
experiments with new concepts of exhaust systems
without taking precautions against the hot and corro-
sive environment when directly testing on an opera-
tional internal combustion engine.
The exhaust noise of an engine is generated dur-
ing the exhaust cycle. When the exhaust valve opens,
the remaining pressure at the end of the expansion cy-
cle discharges to the exhaust manifold pressure level.
Then, the remaining gas is scavenged by the piston.
The terms ”blowdown” and ”displacement” are used
to denote these two phases of the exhaust cycle. The
blowdown phase is typically very short in duration
compared to the whole exhaust cycle and is respon-
Figure 14: Working scheme of the cold engine sim-
ulator.
Figure 15: The cold engine simulator equipped with
the active exhaust silencer.
sible for the exhaust noise.
Typically, the exhaust
cycle starts 40o to 60o crank angle before the bot-
tom dead center. Until about the bottom dead center,
the gases are discharged due to the pressure differ-
ence between the cylinder and the exhaust manifold.
The cylinder volume change due to the piston move-
ment around the bottom dead center remains small,
about 10% to 15%. Therefore, the blowdown pulse
can be approximated as a discharge of a constant vol-
ume over the exhaust valve resistance. The displace-
ment phase happens mainly at atmospheric level and
ends when the exhaust valve closes at the top dead
center. The noise generated during the displacement
phase can be neglected compared to the blowdown
phase. The cold engine simulator will generate only
the blowdown pressure pulse.
3.2
Working principle.
The working scheme of the cold engine simulator is
presented in ﬁgure 14. It consists of a regular engine
block whose pistons are ﬁxed at the bottom dead cen-
ter. The intake collector is connected via an expan-
sion vessel and a pressure reduction valve to a con-
38
PROCEEDINGS OF ISMA2002 - VOLUME I
ventional pressurized air supply network. The sup-
plied pressure corresponds to the remaining pressure
at the end of the engine expansion cycle at the time
point when the exhaust valve opens. The cam mecha-
nism of the engine block is driven by an electric mo-
tor, which speed can be set on a frequency converter.
During the inlet stroke, the cylinder charges at the in-
take manifold pressure level. When the outlet valve
opens, the cylinder discharges and the pressure pulse
enters the exhaust. This discharge corresponds to the
blowdown phase of an engine exhaust cycle. These
pressure pulses from the simulator exhibit a similar
behaviour as these of a regular combustion engine.
The presented cold engine simulator in the research
work has been built using a Volkwagen 1600 cm3 en-
gine.
Figure 16:
Exhaust acoustical impedances of the
cold engine simulator.
Figure 17: Exhaust acoustical impedances of the op-
erational combustion engine.
To prove that the acoustical characteristics of the
cold engine simulator are equivalent to these of a reg-
ular engine, their acoustical impedance and source
spectrum are compared. At the same time, the electri-
Figure 18: Exhaust acoustical impedances simulated
from the engine part of the electrical analog circuit in
ﬁgure 3 (linearized).
Figure 19: Exhaust acoustical source spectrum of the
cold engine simulator.
Figure 20: Exhaust acoustical source spectrum of an
operational combustion engine.
cal analog circuits will also be validated by determin-
ing their acoustical impedance and source spectrum.
ACTIVE NOISE CONTROL
39
Figure 21: Exhaust acoustical source spectrum of the
simulation of the engine part of the electrical analog
circuit in ﬁgure 3.
3.3
Exhaust acoustical impedance.
Figures 17 and 16 present the acoustical impedances
at the engine exhaust manifold.
The acoustical
impedances are measured according to the ISO/FDIS
10543-2 procedure [9]. The method uses the trans-
fer function between two microphones positioned in
a waveguide connected to the engine exhaust. From
this transfer function, the acoustic impedance is cal-
culated after deriving the reﬂection coefﬁcient from
the measured transfer function. To prevent the engine
to disturb the reﬂection coefﬁcient during the mea-
surements, the engine is run with an electric motor
and the intake is sealed.
Figure 16 presents the acoustical impedance of the
cold engine simulator, running at 1000 rpm.
The
reference impedance (0 dB) corresponds to the con-
nected waveguide characteristic impedance Z0
=
347 kΩ. The center measurement presents the acous-
tical impedance of an 747 cm3 renault engine.
In
ﬁgure 18, the simulated acoustical impedance of the
engine part in the linearized electrical circuit of ﬁg-
ure 3 is presented. The linearization implies: (1) the
switches are not operated, i.e. three switches are al-
ways open and one is closed; (2) the cylinders capac-
itors are ﬁxed to the volume with the piston in the
middle position.
The three impedance curves are similar.
The
−20 dB/decade line below the ﬁrst antiresonance is
determined by the cylinder and the manifold volume.
The antiresonance itself is the Helmholtz resonance
between the cylinder volume and the air mass in the
manifold. All the subsequent resonances are inter-
nal manifold resonances. The phase of the acoustical
impedance ranges between −90o and +90o, i.e. the
impedance ranges between capacitive and inductive.
3.4
Exhaust source spectrum.
Figure 19 and 20 present the sound pressure spectra
measured inside the duct behind the manifold junc-
tion on the cold engine simulator and the operational
combustion engine respectively. Figure 21 presents
the sound pressure spectrum simulated at the mani-
fold junction of the electrical analog circuit presented
in ﬁgure 3. The absolute level is dependent on the
cylinder pressure at the exhaust valve opening time
point and the cylinder volume, the exhaust valve re-
sistance and the connected impedance. The pressure
level decays −20 dB/decade at high frequencies.
Concluding, the cold engine simulator exhibits the
same behaviour as a real engine with regard to acous-
tic phenomena.
3.5
Active silencer.
An active silencer, based on the actuator valve de-
veloped during the previous section, has been built
and tested. A photograph of the cold engine simula-
tor equipped with the active silencer is shown in ﬁg-
ure 14.
Two types of controllers are tested, namely a x-
LMS adaptive feedforward controller and a feedback
controller. The feedforward controller was commer-
cially available at Digisonix. The feedback controller
was developed during the research project and imple-
mented in analog electronic hardware. Reference [10]
provides more information how the feedback con-
troller is developed. The bandwidth of the feedback
controller is about 100 Hz. Both control algorithms
have similar performance. The presented results are
obtained using feedback control.
3.6
Attenuating performance.
Figure 22 presents the tail pipe pressure during ac-
tivating the controller. The cylinder pressure at the
exhaust opening time point equals 400 kPa. The con-
troller is activated at 0.6 s. The low frequency pul-
sation is removed from the exhaust noise. The tail
pipe pressure spectrum with controller off and on is
presented in ﬁgure 23. The silencer is capable to at-
tenuate very low frequency noise, which is extremely
difﬁcult using loudspeaker systems.
The pulsation
frequency is 10 Hz (300 rpm). The SPL reduction
between control on an off amounts 13 dBL and after
A-weighting 4 dBA.
40
PROCEEDINGS OF ISMA2002 - VOLUME I
Figure 22: Tail pipe pressure during time. The feed-
back controller is activated at 0.6 s.
Figure 23: Acoustic tail pipe pressure spectrum with
feedback control on and off.
3.7
Electrical power consumption.
In ﬁgure 24, the measurement of the current through
the voice coil of the actuator valve while activating
the controller is displayed. The controller starts at
0.15 s. The voice coil resistance is 3.6 Ω. The as-
sociated power consumption of the valve to attenuate
the exhaust noise amounts about 4.5 W, which is con-
sistent with the simulated power.
3.8
Back pressure to the engine
In ﬁgure 25, the mean back pressure to the engine
exhaust is displayed. The back pressure is measured
using a piezo-resistive sensor and is ﬁltered through a
1 Hz second order low pass ﬁlter. The back pressure
is decreased from 17 kPa to 2 kPa during the measure-
ment by decreasing the DC-current through the actua-
tor valve voice coil. Meanwhile, the acoustic pressure
level in the tail pipe is monitored.
As equation (4) states, the sound attenuating per-
Figure 24: Current through the actuator valve voice
coil. The controller starts at 0.15 s.
formance is independent of the back pressure, as long
the initial resistance R0 remains high enough such the
total resistance R(t) does not become negative. By
decreasing the DC–current through the actuator valve
voice coil, the initial resistance decreases. As soon
the back pressure sinks below 10 kPa, R(t) should be-
come negative, which is physically not possible. As
result, the noise attenuation capability decreases dra-
matically. The back pressure value of 10 kPa corre-
sponds the value whereupon the silencer was devel-
oped.
In principle, the back pressure can be min-
imized for each engine operation point by an ad-
ditional controller to obtain maximum engine efﬁ-
ciency.
Figure 25:
Tail pipe rms-pressure while the engine
back pressure sinks from 17 kPa until 2 kPa.
4
Conclusion
An active silencer for internal combustion engine ex-
haust noise is developed, using an actuator valve in
ACTIVE NOISE CONTROL
41
conjunction with a buffer volume, capable to atten-
uate the low frequency components of the exhaust
noise without preconnected passive silencers.
This research project leads to the following con-
clusions:
1. Any exhaust noise from a reciprocating engine
can be attenuated by balancing the buffer volume
and the engine back pressure. The back pressure
can be chosen and then the buffer volume can be
determined (or vice versa).
2. An electrical analog circuit is proposed to simu-
late the active silencer on a combustion engine.
The acoustic impedance and the source spectrum
of the modeled engine are similar to these of a
real engine.
3. The actuator valve itself is simulated using an
electrical analog circuit, wherein the electri-
cal, mechanical and ﬂuid-dynamic properties are
modeled in detail. From these results, a proto-
type actuator valve can be constructed.
4. A cold engine simulator is developed which gen-
erates realistic exhaust noise using compressed
air.
It allows acoustic and ﬂuid-dynamic ex-
periments on new concepts of exhaust systems,
without taking precautions against hot corrosive
gases. The exhaust acoustic impedance and the
source spectrum are similar to a real engine.
5. The active silencer has been built and tested on
the cold engine simulator. The noise attenuation
amounts 13 dBL (4 dBA), consuming about 5 W
electrical power and causing 10 kPa back pres-
sure to the engine.
References
[1] U. Sandberg, Noise emissions of road vehicles:
effect of regulations. , Noise News International,
147-206, September 2001.
[2] J. Tichy, Applications for active control of sound
and vibration , Noise News International, 73-86,
June 1996.
[3] Everett Arnold and Warner Frazer, Development
of a prototype active mufﬂer for the Detroit diesel
6V-92 TA industrial engine , SAE-paper 911045
[4] C. Garabedian and G. Zintel, Active noise con-
trol: Dream or reality for passenger cars? , SAE-
paper 2001-01-0003
[5] L. Hardouin, P. Micheau, J. Tartarin and J. Lau-
monier, An anti-pulsatory device used as an ac-
tive noise control system in a duct , acta acustica,
vol 1,189-198,1993
[6] S. Renault, P. Micheau, J. Tartarin and M. Be-
sombes,
Industrial applications of active con-
trol of pulsed ﬂow , Proc. of the Internoise 96
Conference,1061-1066,1996
[7] L. L. Beranek, Acoustics , Mc Graw-Hill, 1954
[8] I. E. Idel’cik,
Memento des pertes de charge ,
Editions Eyrolles, 1986
[9] ISO/FDIS 10534-2, Determination of sound ab-
sorption coefﬁcient and impedance in impedance
tubes , International Organisation for Standard-
ization, Case postale 56, CH-1211 Gen`eve 20,
1998.
[10] R. Boonen and P. Sas, Development of an ac-
tive exhaust silencer for internal combustion en-
gines using feedback control. , SAE-paper 1999-
01-1844
[11] J. B. Heywood, Internal combustion engine fun-
damentals , McGraw-Hill,1988
42
PROCEEDINGS OF ISMA2002 - VOLUME I
