IJSRD - International Journal for Scientific Research & Development| Vol. 4, Issue 11, 2017 | ISSN (online): 2321-0613 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
548 
Design and Analysis of Connecting Rod with Mass Optimization 
Apurv Mukund Dubey1 Lakhan Ashokji Mohta2 
1,2B. Tech. Student 
1,2Department of Mechanical Engineering 
1,2Government College of Engineering, Amravati, Amravati, Maharashtra, India
Abstract— Connecting rod is the intermediate link between 
the piston and the crank. It is responsible to transmit the push 
and pull from the piston pin to crank pin, thus converting the 
reciprocating motion of the piston to rotary motion of the 
crank. The main idea of this study is to do analysis of 
connecting rod and get idea of stress producing during 
compressive and tensile loading. Later it gives idea about 
weight reduction opportunities for a production steel 
connecting rod. This has entailed performing a detailed load 
analysis. Therefore, this study contain two subjects, first, 
load and stress analysis of the connecting rod, and second, 
optimization for weight reduction. In the first part of the 
study, loads acting on the connecting rod and find out 
stresses. In second part the existing design is optimized and 
mass reduction is achieved. 
Key words: FEA, FEM, CAD, Optimization 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A. Single Slider Crank chain 
A single slider crank chain is a modification of basic four 
bar chain. It consists of one sliding and three turning pairs. It 
is usually found in reciprocating steam engine mechanism. 
This mechanism convert rotary motion into reciprocating 
motion and vice versa. 
 
Fig. 1: Single slider crank mechanism 
In single slider crank chain as shown in Fig 1.1 the 
link 1 and link 2 ,and link 2 and link 3, and links 3 and 4, 
form three turning pairs while the link 4 & 1 form sliding 
pair. 
The link 1 corresponds to frame of engine which is 
fixed. The link 2 corresponds to crank; link 3 corresponds to 
connecting rod and link 4 corresponds to cross head. As the 
crank rotates the cross head reciprocates in the guides and 
thus piston reciprocates in the cylinder. 
B. Introduction to Connecting Rod 
Connecting rod is the intermediate link between the piston 
and the crank. And is responsible to transmit the push and 
pull from the piston pin to crank pin, thus converting the 
reciprocating motion of the piston to rotary motion of the 
crank. Connecting rod, automotives should be lighter and 
lighter, should consume less fuel and at the same time they 
should provide comfort and safety to passengers, that 
unfortunately leads to increase in weight of the vehicle. This 
tendency in vehicle construction led the invention and 
implementation of quite new materials which are light and 
meet design requirements. Lighter connecting rods help to 
decrease lead caused by forces of inertia in engine as it does 
not require big balancing weight on crankshaft. 
Connecting rods for automotive applications are 
typically manufactured by forging from either wrought steel 
or powdered metal. They could also be cast. However, 
castings could have blow-holes which are detrimental from 
durability and fatigue points of view. The fact that forgings 
produce blow-hole-free and better rods gives them an 
advantage over cast rods. 
 
Fig. 2: Connecting rod 
In a reciprocating piston engine, the connecting rod 
connects the piston to the crank or crankshaft. In modern 
automotive internal combustion engines, the connecting rods 
are most usually made of steel for production engines, but 
can be made of aluminium (for lightness and the ability to 
absorb high impact at the expense of durability) or titanium 
(for a combination of strength and lightness at the expense 
of affordability) for high performance engines, or of cast 
iron for applications such as motor scooters. 
Connecting rods are highly dynamically loaded 
components used for power transmission in combustion 
engines. The optimization of connecting rod had already 
started as early year 1983 by Webster and his team. 
However, each day consumers are looking for the best from 
the best. That’s why the optimization is really important 
especially in automotive industry. Optimization of the 
component is to make the less time to produce the product 
that is stronger, lighter and less cost. The design and weight 
of the connecting rod influence on car performance. Hence, 
it is effect on the car manufacture credibility. Change in the 
structural design and also material will be significant 
increments in weight and performance of the engine. 
Due to its large volume production, it is only 
logical that optimization of the connecting rod for its weight 
or volume will result in large-scale savings. It can also 
achieve the objective of reducing the weight of the engine 
component, thus reducing inertia loads, reducing engine 
weight and improving engine performance and fuel 
economy. 
C. Introduction to CATIA 
CATIA (Computer Aided Three-Dimensional Interactive 
Application) commonly referred to as a 3D Product 
Lifecycle Management software suite. CATIA supports 
Design and Analysis of Connecting Rod with Mass Optimization 
 (IJSRD/Vol. 4/Issue 11/2017/144) 
 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
549 
multiple 
stages 
of 
product 
development, 
including 
conceptualization, design (CAD), engineering (CAE) and 
manufacturing (CAM). CATIA facilitates collaborative 
engineering across disciplines around its 3DEXPERIENCE 
platform, including surfacing and space design, mechanical 
engineering and system engineering. 
D. Introduction to ANSYS 
ANSYS is general-purpose Finite Element Modeling and 
Analysis software package. Finite Element Analysis is a 
numerical method of deconstructing a complex system into 
very small pieces (of user-designated size) called elements. 
The software implements equations that govern the behavior 
of these elements and solves them all; creating a 
comprehensive explanation of how the system acts as a 
whole. This type of analysis is typically used for the design 
and optimization of a system far too complex to analyze by 
hand. ANSYS provides a cost-effective way to explore the 
performance of products or processes in a virtual 
environment. This type of product development is termed 
virtual prototyping. With virtual prototyping techniques, 
users can iterate various scenarios to optimize the product 
long before the manufacturing is started. This enables a 
reduction in the level of risk, and in the cost of ineffective 
designs. ANSYS 14.0 is used for having the best 
computational results. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
The connecting rod is subjected to a complex state of 
loading. It undergoes high cyclic loads of the order of 108 to 
109 cycles, which range from high compressive loads due to 
combustion, to high tensile loads due to inertia. Therefore, 
durability of this component is of critical importance. Due to 
these factors, the connecting rod has been the topic of 
research for different aspects such as production technology, 
materials, performance simulation, fatigue, etc. For the 
current study, it was necessary to investigate finite element 
modeling 
techniques, 
optimization 
techniques, 
developments in production technology, new materials, 
fatigue modeling, and manufacturing cost analysis. This 
brief literature survey reviews some of these aspects. 
Webster et al. (1983) performed three dimensional 
finite element analysis of a high-speed diesel engine 
connecting rod. For this analysis they used the maximum 
compressive load which was measured experimentally, and 
the maximum tensile load which is essentially the inertia 
load of the piston assembly mass. The load distributions on 
the piston pin end and crank end were determined 
experimentally. They modeled the connecting rod cap 
separately, and also modeled the bolt pretension using beam 
elements and multi point constraint equations. 
Kuldeep B, Arun L.R, Mohammed Faheem [3] in 
which they replaced   connecting rod by aluminum based 
composite material reinforced with silicon carbide and fly 
ash. And it also describes the modelling and analysis of 
connecting rod. FEA analysis was carried out by considering 
two materials. The parameters like von miss stress, von 
misses strain and displacements were obtained from ANSYS 
software. Compared to the former material the new material 
found to have less weight and better stiffness. It resulted in 
reduction of 43.48% of weight, with 75% reduction in 
displacement. 
Mr. 
J.D.Ramani, 
Prof. 
Sunil 
Shukla, 
Dr. 
Pushpendra Kumar Sharma (2014) [4] studied the various 
loads acting on connecting rod and then modeled the 
connecting rod in Pro-E. They performed the analysis of 
connecting rod using ANSYS 14 under the action of 
compressive as well as tensile loads. In later part of analysis 
they gave a brief idea of mass optimization of connecting 
rod. 
M.S. Shaari, M.M. Rahman, M.M. Noor, K. 
Kadirgama and A.K. Amirruddin [5] designed connecting 
rod of internal combustion engine using the topology 
optimization. The objectives of this paper are to develop 
structural modeling, finite element analyze and the 
optimization of the connecting rod for robust design. The 
structure 
of 
connecting 
rod 
was 
modeled 
utilized 
SOLIDWORKS software. Finite element modeling and 
analysis were performed using MSC/ PATRAN and MSC 
/NASTRAN software. Linear static analysis was carried out 
to obtain the stress/strain state results. The mesh 
convergence analysis was performed to select the best mesh 
or the analysis. The topology optimization technique is used 
to achieve the objectives of optimization which is to reduce 
the weight of the connecting rod. From the FEA analysis 
Result s, TET10 predicted higher maximum stress than 
TET4 and maximum principal stress captured the maximum 
stress. The crank end is suggested to be redesign based on 
the topology optimization results. The optimized connecting 
rod is 11.7% lighter and predicted low maximum stress 
compare to initial design. For future research, the 
optimization should cover on material optimization to 
increase the strength of the connecting rod.  
K. Sudershan Kumar, Dr. k. Tirupathi Reddy, Syed 
Altaf Hussan “Modeling and analysis of two Wheeler 
connecting rod” [6] in this project connecting rod is replaced 
by Aluminum reinforced with Boron carbide for Suzuki 
GS150R motorbike. A 2D drawing is drafted from the 
calculations. A parametric model of connecting rod is 
modelled using PRO-E 4.0 software. Analysis is carried out 
by using ANSYS software. Finite element analysis of 
connecting rod is done by considering two materials, viz.. 
Aluminum Reinforced with Boron Carbide and Aluminum 
360. The best combination of parameters like Von misses 
stress and strain, Deformation, Factor of safety and weight 
reduction for two wheeler piston were done in ANSYS 
software. Compared to carbon steel, aluminum boron 
carbide and aluminum 360, Aluminum boron carbide is 
found to have working factor of safety is nearer to 
theoretical factor of safety, 33.17% to reduce the weight, to 
increase the stiffness by 48.55% and to reduce the stress 
by10.35% and most stiffer. 
Vivek.c.pathade, Bhumeshwar Patle, Ajay N. 
Ingale ”Stress Analysis of I.C. Engine Connecting Rod by 
FEM” [7] dealt with the stress analysis of connecting rod by 
finite element method using pro-e wild fire 4.0 and ansys 
work bench 11.0 software. And concluded that the stress 
induced in the small end of the connecting rod are greater 
than the stresses induced at the bigger end, therefore the 
chances of failure of the connecting rod may be at the fillet 
section of both end. 
Om 
Parkash, 
Vikas 
Gupta, 
Vinod 
Mittal 
“Optimizing the Design of Connecting Rod under Static and 
Fatigue Loading” [8] main objective of this work is to re-
Design and Analysis of Connecting Rod with Mass Optimization 
 (IJSRD/Vol. 4/Issue 11/2017/144) 
 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
550 
optimize the existing design of connecting rod of universal 
tractor (U650) by changing some of the design variables 
.The existing design performs modelling and evaluates 
critical regions in the connecting rod under fatigue loading. 
In the present work, 
The model is developed, analyzed and designed 
using CATIA 19, PRO-E and ANSYS workbench v12. 
Optimization of connecting rod is done under same 
boundary and loading conditions for variation in the few 
stress and fatigue parameters i.e. stresses, weight, life, 
damage, bi-axiality indication and safety factor. The 
allowable numbers of cycles under fully reversed fatigue 
loading are increased and assumed up to a maximum limit 
of 109 cycles. Stress concentration coefficient is varied to 
obtain the maximum cycles condition. The critical regions 
under both static and fatigue analysis are identified and 
improved. The connecting rod is modelled and optimized for 
the reduced weight, improved life and manufacturability. 
The results obtained from performed analysis can be used to 
modify the design of existing connecting rod, so that better 
performance 
i.e. 
reduced 
inertia, 
fatigue 
life 
and 
manufacturability can be obtained under varying static and 
fatigue conditions. 
In a published SAE case study (1997), a 
replacement connecting rod with 14% weight savings was 
designed by removing material from areas that showed high 
factor of safety. Factor of safety with respect to fatigue 
strength was obtained by performing FEA with applied 
loads including bolt tightening load, piston pin interference 
load, compressive gas load and tensile inertia load. The 
study lays down certain guidelines regarding the use of the 
fatigue limit of the material and its reduction by a certain 
factor to account for the as-forged surface. The study also 
indicates that buckling and bending stiffness are important 
design factors that must be taken into account during the 
design process. On the basis of the stress and strain 
measurements performed on the connecting rod, close 
agreement was found with loads predicted by inertia theory. 
The study also concludes that stresses due to bending loads 
are substantial and should always be taken into account 
during any design exercise. 
III. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 
A. Material of connecting rod 
Connecting rod is manufactured by drop forging process or 
by casting process. Generally for high strength and, material 
saving drop forging process is more commonly used. 
Various materials such as wrought steel forged steel, cast 
iron, aluminum, titanium, powdered metal etc. Most 
commonly use material among these is forged steel. The 
material properties of forged steel are as follows. 
Sr.no 
Property 
Value 
1 
Young’s Modulus of Elasticity (GPa) 
201 
2 
Poisson’s ratio 
0.33 
3 
Density (kg/m3 ) 
7850 
4 
Yield stress (MPa) 
550 
Table 1: Properties of Forged steel 
B. Detailed Dimensions of Connecting Rod 
 
 
Fig. 3: Detailed dimensions of connecting rod 
 
Fig. 4: Cross section of connecting rod 
C. CAD Model Development 
Detailed dimensions of connecting rod are shown in Fig.3 
and Fig.4. CAD modeling software is dedicated for the 
specialized job of 3D-modelling. The model of the 
connecting rod includes many complicated parts. . It is very 
essential that the developed computer model is exactly a 
replica of the physical specimen. The connecting rod has 
been modelled in CATIA V5 R20 as shown in Fig.5. 
Connecting rod modelled in Part Design Workbench. Two 
modules of CATIA V5 R20 are used to develop the model 
of connecting rod. 
 
Sketcher Module. 
 
Part Module. 
 
Fig. 5: Developed CAD model of connecting rod 
IV. FEA OF CONNECTING ROD 
Element analysis (FEA) has become common place in 
recent years, and is now the basis of a multibillion dollar per 
year industry. Numerical solutions to even very complicated 
stress problems can now be obtained routinely using FEA, 
and the method is so important that even introductory 
treatments of mechanics of materials such as these modules 
should outline its principal features. 
FEA is having a large number of advantages such 
as the results can be visualized easily, the time of design is 
less, number of prototypes to be produced decreased, testing 
of prototypes has become easy, optimum design is achieved 
etc. 
Design and Analysis of Connecting Rod with Mass Optimization 
 (IJSRD/Vol. 4/Issue 11/2017/144) 
 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
551 
A. Static Analysis of connecting rod  
ANSYS 14 Mechanical APDL model was used for the 
analysis of connecting rod. CAD model of connecting rod 
was imported in ANSYS. Later Structural analysis was 
performed using following general procedure: 
1) The CAD model was imported in ANSYS workbench 
2) 10 node SOLID 187 element was selected for meshing 
3) Material properties were defined. 
4) Model was meshed with element size as 2 mm 
5) Boundary conditions were applied 
6) Solution was done 
7) Results were analysed 
1) Element Type 
10 node SOLID 187 as shown in Fig.6. was the element 
selected for meshing the CAD model of connecting rod. 
SOLID187 element is a higher order 3-D, 10-node element. 
SOLID187 has quadratic displacement behaviour and is well 
suited to modelling irregular meshes. The element is defined 
by 10 nodes having three degrees of freedom at each node: 
translations in the nodal x, y, and z directions. The element 
has plasticity, hyper elasticity, creep, stress stiffening, large 
deflection, and large strain capabilities. It also has mixed 
formulation capability for simulating deformations of nearly 
incompressible 
elastoplastic 
materials, 
and 
fully 
incompressible hyper elastic materials. The minimum edge 
length of the element was given as 2mm. This resulted in 
55871 elements in the finite element model. 
 
Fig. 6: Geometry of SOLID187 
2) Material Properties 
As discussed earlier the material selected for analysis is 
forged steel and material properties given in Table I are 
used. 
3) Boundary conditions 
Boundary conditions mean the constraints and forces 
applied to the FE model. In this case the analysis is carried 
out for compression and tension so different boundary 
conditions are applied to the FE model in both the cases. 
In compression and tension maximum gas pressure 
of 16 MPa is applied on the connecting rod. For 
compressive loading 16 MPa pressure is applied at the small 
end and big end is kept fixed. For tensile loading 16 MPa 
pressure is applied at big end and small end is kept fixed. 
The results obtained are as shown in Fig.7 and Fig.8 and are 
summarized in Table 2. 
 
 
Fig. 7: Stresses and displacement of connecting rod in 
compressive loading condition 
 
 
Fig. 8: Stresses and displacement of connecting rod in 
tensile loading condition 
Sr. 
No. 
Loading 
condition 
Load 
applied 
(MPa) 
Maximum 
Stress 
(N/mm2) 
Maximum 
Displacement 
(mm) 
1 
Compressive 
16 
132.971 
0.021969 
2 
Tensile 
16 
141.172 
0.024548 
Table 2: Results of static analysis of connecting rod 
V. OPTIMIZATION 
Optimization means an act, process or methodology of 
making something (a design, system) as fully perfect, 
functional, or effective as possible. As stated earlier in the 
objectives of the project one of the objectives was 
optimization of the design for mass reduction. Generally 
optimization is done in terms of mass reduction or weight 
reduction due to following two reasons: 
 
As mass reduces material saving takes place and thus 
cost of production reduces 
 
As mass reduces the inertia forces acting on the rod 
reduces 
In the optimization on current design the second 
aspect is used i.e. shape optimization. Some of the material 
is removed from the shank by giving a slight chamfer on its 
lateral edges. Due addition of this chamfer the mass of 
Design and Analysis of Connecting Rod with Mass Optimization 
 (IJSRD/Vol. 4/Issue 11/2017/144) 
 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
552 
connecting rod is reduced by 9.89 grams. More amount of 
mass can be reduced by using composites of aluminum 
which are lighter in weight and have same strength as forged 
steel. The CAD model of optimized design of connecting 
rod is shown in Fig.9. The cross section of optimized design 
is shown in the Fig.10. 
The main objective of optimization is to reduce 
mass and increase the strength of the existing design. In this 
project after optimizing the design it was found that the 
stresses induced are also reduced. Thus optimizing the 
design does not alter its safety and hence optimized design 
is also safe. 
Similar boundary conditions were applied to the 
optimized design and the results obtained are summarized in 
Table III. 
 
Fig. 9: CAD model Optimized design of connecting rod 
 
Fig. 10: Cross section of connecting rod 
Sr. 
No. 
Loading 
condition 
Load 
applied 
(MPa) 
Maximum 
Stress 
(N/mm2) 
Maximum 
Displacement 
(mm) 
1 
Compressive 
16 
129.791 
0.023419 
2 
Tensile 
16 
149.86 
0.02599 
Table 3: Summary for optimized design of connecting rod 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The design of a standard connecting rod was modeled in 
CATIA and then static analysis was carried out with the 
help of ANSYS 14. Static analysis was carried out for 
compressive and tensile loading conditions. So following 
conclusions are derived: 
 
The stresses were found to be less than permissible 
value and hence the design is safe in both compression 
as well as in tensile loading. 
 
Optimization is done and mass is reduced by 9.89 
grams. 
 
The stresses induced in optimized design are found to 
be less than the original stress value. Thus strength is 
increased. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  http://www1.ansys.com/customer/content/documentatio
n/121/ans_tut.pdf 
[2]  Nitin S. Gokhale, Sanjay S. Deshpande, Sanjeev 
V.Bedekar, Anand N Thite “Practical Finite Element 
Analysis” First Edition. 
[3]  Kuldeep B, Arun L.R, Mohammed Faheem, “ Analysis 
and optimization of connecting rod using ALFASiC 
Composite 
material”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and 
Technology, June 2013. 
[4]  Mr. J.D.Ramani, Prof. Sunil Shukla, Dr. Pushpendra 
Kumar Sharma, “FE-Analysis of Connecting Rod of 
I.C.Engine 
by 
Using 
ANSYS 
for 
Material 
Optimization”, Mr. J.D.Ramani et al Int. Journal of 
Engineering Research and Applications ISSN : 2248-
9622, Vol. 4, Issue 3( Version 1), March 2014, pp.216-
220. 
[5]  M.S. Shaari, M.M. Rahman, M.M. Noor, K. Kadirgama 
and A.K. Amirruddin, “Design of connecting rod of 
internal combustion engine: A Topology Optimization 
Research” 
National 
Conference 
in 
Mechanical 
Engineering Research and Postgraduate Studies (2nd 
NCMER 2010) 3-4 December 2010, Faculty of 
Mechanical 
Engineering, 
UMP 
Pekan, 
Kuantan, 
Pahang, Malaysia; pp. 155-166 ISBN: 978-967-0120-
04-1. 
[6]  K. Sudershan Kumar, Dr. k. Tirupathi Reddy, Syed 
Altaf Hussan “Modeling and analysis of two Wheeler 
connecting rod”, International Journal of Modern 
Engineering Research,   Vol -2, Issue- 5, pp-3367-3371, 
Sep-Oct-2012. 
[7]  Vivek.c.pathade, Bhumeshwar Patle, Ajay N. Ingale 
”Stress Analysis of I.C. Engine Connecting Rod by 
FEM”, International Journal of Engineering and 
Innovative Technology, Vol-1, Issue-3, pp-12-15, 
March2012. 
[8]  Om Parkash, Vikas Gupta, Vinod Mittal “Optimizing 
the Design of Connecting Rod under Static and Fatigue 
Loading”, International Journal of Research 
in 
Management, Science & Technology (E-ISSN: 2321-
3264) Vol. 1; No. 1, June 2013. 
