32
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI)
DESIGN EVALUATION OF FLYWHEEL USED IN PETROL 
ENGINE
G.Ramakrishna Reddy1*, Dilip Maha2, N.Veeranjaneyulu3 
1 Research Scholar, Department Of Mechanical Engineering, Aurora's Scientific Technological & Research Academy, Hyderabad, India
2 Professor , Department Of Mechanical Engineering, Aurora's Scientific Technological & Research Academy, Hyderabad, India
3 Assistant professor,Department Of Mechanical Engineering, Aurora's Scientific Technological & Research Academy, Hyderabad, 
India.
*Corresponding Author: 
G.Ramakrishna Reddy, 
Research Scholar, Department Of Mechanical Engineering, 
Aurora's Scientific Technological & Research Academy, 
Hyderabad, India
Published: Sep 08, 2014
Review Type: peer reviewed
Volume: I, Issue : III
Citation: G.Ramakrishna Reddy, Research Scholar 
(2014) COMPARISON OF ALUMINUM & COMPOSITE 
MATERIALS FOR SHIP PROPELLER USING FEA
INTRODUCTION TO IC ENGINES
The internal combustion engine is an engine in 
which the combustion of a fuel (normally a fossil 
fuel) occurs with an oxidizer (usually air) in a com-
bustion chamber. In an internal combustion engine 
the expansion of the high-temperature and -pres-
sure gases produced by combustion applies direct 
force to some component of the engine, such as pis-
tons, turbine blades, or a nozzle. This force moves 
the component over a distance, generating useful 
mechanical energy. 
The term internal combustion engine usually refers 
to an engine in which combustion is intermittent, 
such as the more familiar four-stroke and two-
stroke piston engines, along with variants, such as 
the Wankel rotary engine. A second class of internal 
combustion engines use continuous combustion: 
gas turbines, jet engines and most rocket engines, 
each of which are internal combustion engines on 
the same principle as previously described.[1][2][3]
[4]
The internal combustion engine (or ICE) is quite dif-
ferent from external combustion engines, such as 
steam or Stirling engines, in which the energy is de-
livered to a working fluid not consisting of, mixed 
with, or contaminated by combustion products. 
Abstract
A flywheel used in machines serves as a reservoir which stores energy during the period when the supply of energy is 
more than the requirement and releases it during the period when the requirement of energy is more than supply. 
For example, in I.C. engines, the energy is developed only in the power stroke which is much more than engine load, and 
no energy is being developed  during the suction, compression and exhaust strokes in case of four stroke engines. The 
excess energy is developed during power stroke is absorbed by the flywheel and releases its to the crank shaft during 
the other strokes in which no energy is developed, thus rotating the crankshaft at a uniform speed.                     
The flywheelis located on one end of the crankshaft and serves two purposes. First, through its inertia, it reduces vibra-
tion by smoothing out the power stroke as each cylinder fires. Second, it is the mounting surface used to bolt the engine 
up to its load. 
 The aim of the project is to design a flywheel for a multi cylinder petrol engine flywheel using the empirical formulas. A 
2D drawing is drafted using the calculations. A parametric model of the flywheel is designed using 3D modeling software 
Pro/Engineer.
The forces acting on the flywheel are also calculated. The strength of the flywheel is validated by applying the forces on 
the flywheel in analysis software ANSYS.
Structural analysis, modal analysis and fatigue analysis are done on the flywheel. Structural analysis is used to deter-
mine whether flywheel withstands under working conditions. Fatigue analysis is done for finding the life of the compo-
nent. Modal analysis is done to determine the number of mode shapes for flywheel.
Analysis is done for two materials Cast Iron and Aluminum Alloy A360 to compare the results.
Pro/ENGINEER is the standard in 3D product design, featuring industry-leading productivity tools that promote best 
practices in design.
ANSYS is general-purpose finite element analysis (FEA) software package.  Finite Element Analysis is a numerical meth-
od of deconstructing a complex system into very small pieces (of user-designated size) called elements.
1401-1402
33
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
Working fluids can be air, hot water, pressurized 
water or even liquid sodium, heated in some kind 
of boiler.
A large number of different designs for ICEs have 
been developed and built, with a variety of different 
strengths and weaknesses. Powered by an energy-
dense fuel (which is very frequently gasoline, a liq-
uid derived from fossil fuels). While there have been 
and still are many stationary applications, the real 
strength of internal combustion engines is in mobile 
applications and they dominate as a power supply 
for cars, aircraft, and boats, from the smallest to 
the largest.
Applications
Internal combustion engines are most commonly 
used for mobile propulsion in vehicles and porta-
ble machinery. In mobile equipment, internal com-
bustion is advantageous since it can provide high 
power-to-weight ratios together with excellent fuel 
energy density. Generally using fossil fuel (mainly 
petroleum), these engines have appeared in trans-
port in almost all vehicles (automobiles, trucks, mo-
torcycles, boats, and in a wide variety of aircraft and 
locomotives).
Where very high power-to-weight ratios are required, 
internal combustion engines appear in the form of 
gas turbines. These applications include jet aircraft, 
helicopters, large ships and electric generators.
Four-stroke cycle (or Otto cycle)
1. Intake
2.Compression
3.Power
4. Exhaust
As their name implies, operation of four stroke 
internal combustion engines have four basic steps 
that repeat with every two revolutions of the en-
gine:
Intake
o Combustible mixtures are emplaced in the com-
bustion chamber
Compression
o The mixtures are placed under pressure
Combustion (Power)
o The mixture is burnt, almost invariably a defla-
gration, although a few systems involve detona-
tion. The hot mixture is expanded, pressing on and 
moving parts of the engine and performing useful 
work.
Exhaust
o The cooled combustion products are exhausted 
into the atmosphere
Many engines overlap these steps in time; jet en-
gines do all steps simultaneously at different parts 
of the engines.
Many engines overlap these steps in time; jet en-
gines do all steps simultaneously at different parts 
of the engines.
Introduction To Flywheel
A flywheel is a mechanical device with a significant 
moment of inertia used as a storage device for ro-
tational energy. Flywheels resist changes in their 
rotational speed, which helps steady the rotation of 
the shaft when a fluctuating torque is exerted on it 
by its power source such as a piston-based (recipro-
cating) engine, or when an intermittent load, such 
as a piston pump, is placed on it.
Flywheels can be used to produce very high power 
pulses for experiments, where drawing the power 
from the public network would produce unaccep-
table spikes. A small motor can accelerate the fly-
wheel between the pulses.
Recently, flywheels have become the subject of ex-
tensive research as power storage devices for uses 
in vehicles and power plants.
Physics
A flywheel is a spinning wheel or disc with a fixed 
axle so that rotation is only about one axis. Energy 
is stored in the rotor as kinetic energy, or more spe-
cifically, rotational energy:
Where:
•ω is the angular velocity, and
•Iis the moment of inertia of the mass about the 
center of rotation. The moment of inertia is the 
measure of resistance to torque applied on a spin-
34
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
ning object (i.e. the higher the moment of inertia, 
the slower it will spin after being applied a given 
force).
Application Of Flywheel Used In Ic Engines
A 4 cylinder engine produces a power stroke eve-
ry half crankshaft revolution, an 8 cylinder, every 
quarter revolution.  This means that a V8 will be 
smother running than a 4.  To keep the combustion 
pulses from generating a vibration,  a flywheel is at-
tached to the back of the crankshaft.  The flywheel is 
a disk that is about 12 to 15 inches in diameter. On 
a standard transmission car, the flywheel is a heavy 
iron disk that doubles as part of the clutch system. 
On automatic equipped vehicles, the flywheel is a 
stamped steel plate that mounts the heavy torque 
converter.  The flywheel uses inertia to smooth out 
the normal engine pulses.
 
Introduction To Pro/Engineer
Pro/ENGINEER Wildfire is the standard in 3D prod-
uct design, featuring industry-leading productivity 
tools that promote best practices in design while 
ensuring compliance with your industry and com-
pany standards. Integrated Pro/ENGINEER CAD/
CAM/CAE solutions allow you to design faster than 
ever, while maximizing innovation and quality to ul-
timately create exceptional products.
Customer requirements may change and time pres-
sures may continue to mount, but your product 
design needs remain the same - regardless of your 
project's scope, you need the powerful, easy-to-use, 
affordable solution that Pro/ENGINEER provides.
Model Of Flywheel
2D Drawing
Introduction To Fea
FEA consists of a computer model of a material or 
design that is stressed and analyzed for specific re-
sults. It is used in new product design, and existing 
product refinement. A company is able to verify a 
proposed design will be able to perform to the cli-
ent's specifications prior to manufacturing or con-
struction. Modifying an existing product or struc-
ture is utilized to qualify the product or structure 
for a new service condition.In case of structural fail-
ure, FEA may be used to help determine the design 
modifications to meet the new condition. 
FEA uses a complex system of points called nodes 
which make a grid called a mesh. This mesh is pro-
grammed to contain the material and structural 
properties which define how the structure will react 
to certain loading conditions. Nodes are assigned at 
a certain density throughout the material depend-
ing on the anticipated stress levels of a particular 
area. Regions which will receive large amounts of 
stress usually have a higher node density than 
those which experience little or no stress. Points of 
interest may consist of: fracture point of previously 
tested material, fillets, corners, complex detail, and 
high stress areas. The mesh acts like a spider web 
in that from each node, there extends a mesh ele-
ment to each of the adjacent nodes. This web of vec-
tors is what carries the material properties to the 
object, creating many elements. 
Introduction To Ansys
ANSYS is general-purpose finite element analysis 
(FEA) software package.  Finite Element Analysis 
is a numerical method of deconstructing a complex 
system into very small pieces (of user-designated 
size) called elements. The software implements 
equations that govern the behaviour of these ele-
ments and solves them all; creating a comprehen-
sive explanation of how the system acts as a whole. 
These results then can be presented in tabulated, 
or graphical forms.  This type of analysis is typically 
used for the design and optimization of a system far 
too complex to analyze by hand.  Systems that may 
fit into this category are too complex due to their 
geometry, scale, or governing equations. 
35
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
Structural Analysis of Flywheel
              Imported Model from Pro/Engineer
Displacement  Vector Sum
                         Von Mises Stress
Fatigue Analysis
Location: 1Node 12536 at the constrained area.
The combination of event 2, load 1 and event 2, 
load 2 produces an alternating stress intensity 
of 0.64398e-01 N/mm2. The flywheel was sub-
jected to 5000 cycles while from the S-N Table, the 
maximum number of cycles allowed at that stress 
intensity is 1,000,000. 
The partial usage value, 0.005, is the ratio of cycles 
used/cycles allowed.
The combination of event 1, load 1 and event 1, 
load 2 produces an alternating stress intensity of 
0.86604e-01 N/mm2. The flywheel was subjected 
to 500,000 cycles while from the S-N Table, the 
maximum number of cycles allowed at that stress 
intensity is 1,000,000. The partial usage value, 
0.5, is the ratio of cycles used/cycles allowed.
The Cumulative Fatigue Usage value is 0.505, is 
the sum of the partial usage factors (Miner’s rule).
Results
   Cast iron
RESULTS
PERMISSIBLE
DISPLACEMENT
0.334e-3
VONMISES 
STRESS
0.66582
620
Frequency
Displacement
MODE 01
45.254
0.111115
MODE 02
63.595
0.20176
MODE 03
54.501
0.181312
MODE 04
69.819
                          
0.159127
MODE 05
93.227
0.266552
Cast 
iron	
A360 Alloy
Constrained area
Event 1 Load1, Event 1 
500000cycles
Load 2
Event 2 Load1, Event 2 
50000cycles
Load 2
0.10417/mm2
0.77463e-01 
N/mm2
0.86604e-
010.64398e-01
Pressure area
Event 1 Load1, Event 1 
500000Cycles
Load 2
Event 2 Load1, Event 2 
50000cyclesLoad 2
0.17499 N/mm2
0.13012 N/mm2
0.25849 
0.19221 
Open area
Event 1 Load1, Event 1 
500000cycles
Load 2
Event 2 Load1, Event 2 
50000cyclesLoad 2
0.17018 N/mm2
0.12654 N/mm2
0.6954e-01
0.51714e-01 
36
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
CONCLUSION
In our project we have designed a four wheeler fly-
wheel used in a petrol engine using theoretical cal-
culations. 2d drawing is created and modeling of 
flywheel is done using Pro/Engineer.
We have done structural and modal analysis on fly-
wheel using two materials Aluminum Alloy A360 
and Cast Iron to validate our design.
By observing the results, for all the materials the 
stress values are less than their respective permis-
sible yield stress values. So our design is safe.
We have also done modal analysis for number of 
modes to see the displacement of flywheel for num-
ber of frequencies.
By comparing the results for two materials, the 
stress value for Aluminum Alloy A360 is less than 
that of Cast Iron.
So we conclude that for our design, Aluminum A360 
is better material for flywheel. By using Aluminum 
A360 we can reduce Weight. Also it is rust free.
Fatigue analysis is also done on flywheel to verify 
the stress values at the selected nodes. The nodes 
are selected at constrained area, pressure area and 
open area.
In this project its having some disadvantages is by 
replacing with Aluminum A360 energy storage is re-
duced. In this project mainly we done material op-
timization. 
For both the materials the number of cycles allowed 
for flywheel is 500000 cycles.
BIBILOGRAPHY
1.Engineering mechanics STATICS R.C.HIBBLER.
2.Engineering Fundamentalsof theInternal Com-
bustion Engine by Willard W. Pulkrabek
3.MARK’S Calculations for mechanical design by 
Thomas H. Brown
4. Machine Design by R.S. KHURMI, J.K. GUPTA
5.handbook of mechanical engineering - modern 
manufacturing by Ed. Frank Kreith
6.Mechanical Engineering Design by Budynas−Ni-
sbett.
7.Automotive Engineering by Patric GRANT.
8. Automotive.Production.Systems.and.Standardi-
sation by WERNER.
Author
G.Ramakrishna Reddy1*,
Research Scholar, Department Of Mechanical En-
gineering, Aurora's Scientific Technological & Re-
search Academy, Hyderabad, India
Dilip Maha2, 
Professor,Department Of Mechanical Engineering, 
Aurora's Scientific Technological & Research Acad-
emy, Hyderabad, India
N.Veeranjaneyulu3 
Assistant professor,Department Of Mechanical En-
gineering, Aurora's Scientific Technological & Re-
search Academy, Hyderabad, India.
