International 
OPEN      ACCESS                                                                                            Journal 
Of Modern Engineering Research (IJMER) 
 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 30| 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank 
shaft 
 
  V. Mallikarjuna Reddy1, T. Vijaya Devi 2 
1M.Tech student, Dept of Mech. Engg, CMR Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, India 
2 Asst. prof, Dept of Mech. Engg, CMR Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. Introduction 
Crankshaft  is  one  of  the  most  important moving  parts  in  internal  combustion  engine. 
Crankshaft  is  a  large  component  with  a  complex geometry  in  the  engine,  which converts  the 
reciprocating  displacement  of  the  piston  to  a  rotary motion  with  a  four  link  mechanism.  Since the 
crankshaft experiences a large number of load cycles during its service life, fatigue performance and durability 
of this component has to be considered in the design process.  Design  developments  have always  been  an  
important  issue  in  the  crankshaft production  industry,  in  order  to  manufacture  a  less expensive  
component  with  the  minimum  weight possible  and  proper  fatigue  strength  and  other functional  
requirements.  These improvements result in lighter and smaller engines with better fuel Efficiency and higher 
power output. Crankshaft must be strong enough to take the downward force of the power stroke without 
excessive bending.  So the reliability and life of the internal combustion engine depend on the strength of the 
crankshaft largely. And as the engine runs, the power impulses hit the crankshaft in one place and then 
another. This study is  conduct  on  a  six  cylinder  engine  crank  shaft. The modelling of six cylinder engine 
crankshaft is done by using Unigraphics-NX7.5 software.  The finite  element  analysis  has  been performed  
on crankshaft  in  order  to  optimize  the  weight  and manufacturing  cost.  The material for crankshaft is 
Cast Iron. Other alternate materials on which analysis has been done are, Forged steel, high carbon steel. 
 
II. Literature Review 
Solanki et al. [1] presented literature review on crankshaft design and optimization.  The materials, 
manufacturing process, failure analysis, design consideration etc. were reviewed.  The  design  of  the 
crankshaft  considers  the  dynamic  loading  and  the optimization  can  lead  to  a  shaft  diameter  satisfying  
the requirements  of  the automobile specifications with  cost and size effectiveness. They concluded that crack 
grows faster  on  the  free  surface  while  the  central  part  of  the crack front  becomes straighter. Fatigue is 
the dominant mechanism of failure of the crankshaft.  Residual imbalances along the length of the crankshafts 
are Crucial to performance. 
 Meng et al. [2] discussed the stress analysis and modal analysis of a 4 cylinder crankshaft. FEM 
software ANSYS  was  used  to  analyse  the  vibration  modal  and distortion  and  stress  status  of  crank  
Abstract: This paper deals with; the problem occurred in six cylinders four stroke engine crankshaft.  It  
consist  of static  structural analysis  of  six cylinder  engine  crank  shaft. It  identifies  and  solves the  
problem  by  using  the  modelling  and  simulation techniques.  The  main  work  was  to  model  the  
crankshaft  with  dimensions  and  then  simulate  the  crankshaft  for  static  structural  analysis.  The 
topic  was  chosen  because  of  increasing  interest  in higher payloads, lower weight, higher efficiency 
and shorter  load  cycles  in  crankshaft.  The modelling software used is Unigraphics-NX7.5 for 
modelling the crankshaft. The analysis software ANSYS is used for structural analysis of crankshaft.  The 
objective  involves modelling  and  analysis  of  crankshaft, so as to identify the effect of stresses on 
crankshaft,  to  compare  various  materials and  to  provide possible solution. Results obtained from the 
aforementioned analysis were then used in optimization of the crankshaft. The first step in the 
optimization process was weight reduction of the component considering static loading. This required the 
stress range under static loading not to exceed the magnitude of the stress range in the original 
crankshaft. Possible weight reduction options and their combinations were considered. The optimization 
process resulted in a weight reduction, increased strength and a reduced cost of the crankshaft. 
Keywords: 6 cylinder Engine Crankshaft, Unigraphics, Finite element analysis, Stress Analysis, 
optimization. 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank shaft 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 31| 
throw.  The relationship between frequency and the vibration modal was explained by the modal analysis of 
crankshaft. This provides  a  valuable  theoretical  foundation  for  the optimization  and  improvement  of  
engine  design. Maximum deformation appears at the centre of the crankpin neck surface.  The  maximum  
stress  appears  at the  fillet  between  the  crankshaft  journal  and  crank cheeks,  and  near  the  central  point  
journal.  The crankshaft deformation was mainly bending deformation was mainly bending deformation under 
the lower frequency.  Maximum  deformation  was  located  at  the link  between  main  bearing  journal  and  
crankpin  and crank cheeks.  So, the area prone to appear the bending fatigue crack. 
 Montazersadgh and Fatemi [3] choose forged steel and a cast iron crankshaft of a single cylinder four 
stroke engine.  Both crankshafts were digitized using a CMM machine.  Load  analysis  was  performed  and 
verification  of  results  by  ADAMS  modelling  of  the engine.  At the next step, geometry and manufacturing 
cost optimization was performed.  Considering  torsional load  in  the  overall  dynamic  loading  conditions  
has  no effect  on  von  mises  stress  at  the  critically  stressed location.  Experimental stress and FEA results 
showed close agreement, within 7% difference. Critical locations on  the  crankshaft  are  all  located  on  the  
fillet  areas because  of  high  stress  gradients  in  these  locations. Geometry optimization results in 18% 
weight reduction of the forged steel.  Fillet rolling induces compressive residual stress in the fillet areas, which 
results in 165% increase in fatigue strength of the crankshaft. 
 
III. Design Calculation For Crankshaft 
The specification of diesel engine for crankshaft is TABULATED below: 
 
No of cylinders 
6 
Bore/Stroke 
86 mm/ 68 mm 
Compression Ratio 
18 : 1 
Max. Power 
8.1 HP @ 3600rpm 
Max. Torque 
16.7 Nm@ 2200rpm 
Maximum Gas pressure 
25 Bar 
Table 1: Specification of engine 
 
Deign of crankshaft when the crank is at an angle of Maximum bending moment. At  this  position  of  the  
crank,  the  maximum  gas  pressure  on  the piston  will  transmit  maximum  force  on  the  crankpin  in  the  
plane of  the  crank  causing  only  bending  of  the  shaft.  The  crankpin  as well  as  ends  of  the  crankshaft  
will  be  only  subjected  to  bending moment.  Thus,  when  the  crank  is  at  the  dead  center,  the  bending 
moment  on  the  shaft  is  maximum  and the  twisting  moment  is zero. 
 
Let,  D  =  Piston  diameter  or  cylinder  bore  in  mm,  p  =  Maximum intensity of pressure on the piston in 
N/mm2The  thrust  in  the  connecting  rod  will  be  equal  to  the  gas  load  on the piston (Fp ). We know 
that gas load on the piston, 
 
Force on the piston:  
Bore diameter (D) =86mm,  
Fp= Area of the bore ×P max 
Fp =π/4 ×D²×P max=14.52 KN 
Distance between two bearings is given by, 
b=2D=2×86=172mm 
Therefore b1=b2=b/2=86mm 
Due  to  this  piston  gas  load  (FP)  acting  horizontally,  there will  be two  horizontal  reactions  H1  and  H2  
at  bearings  1  and  2 
Respectively, such that 
H1=H2=Fp/2=7.26KN 
Design of crank pin against loading 
According to distortion energy theory, the Von-Misses stress induced in the crank-pin is, 
Mev =√ (Kb×Mc) 2+3/4(Kt×Tc) 2 
Where, 
Kb = combined shock and fatigue factor for bending (Assume Kb=2)  
Kt = combined shock and fatigue factor for torsion (Assume K t =1.5) 
Putting the values in above equation we get 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank shaft 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 32| 
Mev=1568KN-mm 
Also we know that  
Mev= π/32×v×443 
1568×103= π/32×v×443 
Von-Mises stress v= 187.49 N/mm2 
 
IV. Modeling Of Crankshaft 
The software used for Modelling of crankshaft is Unigraphics-NX7.5 and software it is developed by 
SIEMENS. 
This is CAD/CAM/CAE software but we are using this for only 3-D part modelling (CAD).  
This CAD includes. 
1. Sketcher 
2. Part modelling (part design) 
3. Surface Design 
4. Assembly Design 
5. Drafting 
 
 
Figure 1: 3-D model of Crankshaft using Unigraphics-Design 1-Original 
 
V. Meshing Of Crankshaft 
The Figure.2 shows the meshed model of crankshaft. The Discretization (Mesh generation) is the first 
step of Finite Element Method. In this step the component or part is divided into number of small parts. In 
discretization  the    no  of  elements  are  59971.The effect of force on each  portion  of  the  component  is  
not  same.  The purpose of discretization is to perform the analysis on each small division separately. 
 
 
Figure 2: Meshed model of crankshaft 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank shaft 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 33| 
VI. Loading And Boundary Conditions 
Crankshaft is a constraint with a ball bearing from one side and with a journal on the other side. The 
ball bearing is press fit to the crankshaft and does not allow the crankshaft to have any motion other than 
rotation about its main axis. Since only 180 degrees of the bearing surfaces facing the load direction constraint 
the motion of the crankshaft. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Load applied on crankshaft 
 
This constraint is defined as a fixed semi-circular surface as wide as ball bearing width. The other 
side of the crankshaft is journal bearing. Therefore this side was modeled as a semi-circular edge facing the 
load at the bottom of the fillet radius fixed in a plane perpendicular to the central axis and free to move along 
central axis direction. 
 
VII. Static Structural Analysis For Crankshaft Design 1-Original 
After the application of boundary conditions and force, the next step is to perform the structural 
analysis of crankshaft.  In  this  structural analysis,  we  are  mainly  concern  with  the  total deformation  and  
the  stresses  acting  on  the  crankshaft  (von-mises  stresses).  When the force is applied, the slight 
deformation and also the stresses take place in the crankshaft. The total deformation of crankshaft is shown in 
Figure.4. The deformation in the crankshaft is not same throughout. The portion in red colour shows that the 
deformation  at  that  region  is  maximum  and  the portion in blue colour shows that the deformation is 
minimum  in  that  region.  The maximum displacement is 12.77 mm.  
 
 
Figure: 4: Deformation of crankshaft 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank shaft 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 34| 
 
Figure5: Von Misses stress for Cast Iron 174.92MPa 
 
 
Figure6: Von Misses stress for Forged steel 184.99 MPa 
     
 
Figure: 7: Von Misses Stress for High Carbon Steel 189.19 MPa 
 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank shaft 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 35| 
The stress acting on the Design1Original crankshaft is shown in Figure.5, 6, and 7 
 
VIII. Geometry Optimization 
In order to achieve the objectives various changes in the initial design of the crankshaft were done and 
they were analysed among them two cases showed the most effective results. Design 1-Original is 
4180032.9702 mm3 and the weight of the Design 1-Original is 33.23kg.In Design 2 Volume of the modified 
design after modification is 4051869.7021 mm3and the weight of the modified Design 2-Modified is 32.21kg. 
After  designing, the  load  and  boundary conditions  were  assigned  to  the  new  model.  After applying the 
loading and boundary conditions, equivalent stress, equivalent strain, and total deformation diagrams are 
obtained. And then the various stress, strain and deformation of the different designs are then compared, 
analysed and the best results give the final optimized design. 
 
 
Figure 8:  Modified 3-D model of Crankshaft using Unigraphics Design 2-Modified 
 
IX. Static Structural Analysis For Crankshaft Design 2-Modified 
The total deformation for a modified crankshaft is shown in Figure.9. The deformation in the 
crankshaft is not same throughout. The portion in red colour shows that the deformation  at  that  region  is  
maximum  and  the portion in blue colour shows that the deformation is minimum  in  that  region.  The 
maximum displacement is 11.57 mm. 
 
 
Figure: 9: Deformation of crankshaft 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank shaft 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 36| 
 
Figure10: Von Misses stress for Cast Iron 162.64MPa            
 
 
 
Figure: 12: Von Misses Stress for High Carbon Steel 175.48MPa 
 
The stress acting on the Design 2-Modified crankshaft is shown in Figure.10, 11, 12 
 
X. Comparison Of Results 
After applying loading and boundary conditions results from ansys were obtained and compiled in 
table  
Model 
Design 1-Original 
Design 2-Modified 
Material 
Von-Misses Stress 
()MPa 
Weight 
(kg) 
Von-Misses Stress 
()MPa 
Weight 
(kg) 
Cast Iron 
174.92 
33.23 
162.64 
32.21 
High Carbon Steel 
189.19 
33.43 
175.48 
32.41 
Forged Steel 
184.99 
35.168 
171.64 
34.04 
Table 2: Results obtained from ANSYS 
 
Design, Analysis and Optimization of a 6 cylinder Engine Crank shaft 
| IJMER | ISSN: 2249–6645 |                             www.ijmer.com                        | Vol. 4 | Iss.8| Aug. 2014 | 37| 
XI. Conclusion 
Finite  Element  analysis  of  the  six cylinder  crankshaft  has  been  done  using  FEA  tool ANSYS. 
From the results obtained from FE analysis, many discussions have been made.  
1. Results show the improvement in the strength of the crankshaft as the maximum limits of stresses. The 
value of von-misses stresses that comes out from the analysis is far less than material yield stress so our 
design is safe.  
2. The weight of the crankshaft is also reduced by 1133g (5% of weight Reduction) from Design 1-Original 
to Design 1-Modified. Thereby, reduces the inertia force. 
3. As the weight of the crankshaft is decreased this will decrease the cost of the crankshaft and increase the 
engine performance 
4. Above Results shows that FEA results conformal matches with the theoretical calculation so we can say 
that FEA is a good tool to reduce the time consuming theoretical work. 
5.  
Acknowledgements 
The support extended by the guide (Smt. T. Vijaya Devi) and college authorities is highly appreciated 
and acknowledged with due respect.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1].  
A. Solanki, K. Tamboli,M.J, M.J, M.J, M.J.  Zinjuwadia, (2011), “Crankshaft Design and Optimization- A 
Review” National Conference on Recent Trends in Engineering & Technology.  
[2] 
J.  Meng, Y.  Liu, R.  Liu, (2011), “Finite Element analysis of 4-Cylinder Diesel Crankshaft” I.J.  Image, Graphics 
and Signal Processing, vol 5, pp. 22-29  
[3].  
F.  H.  Montazersadgh, A.  Fatemi,  (2007), “Project  Report  on  Stress  Analysis  and Optimization  of  
Crankshafts  Subject  to Dynamic Loading” The University of Toledo  
[4].  
Y.  Gongzhi, Y.  Hongliang, D.  Shulin,  (2011), “Crankshaft  Dynamic  Strength  Analysis  for Marine  Diesel  
Engine”  Third  International Conference  on  Measuring  Technology  and Mechatronics Automation, pp. 795-799  
[5].  
G.  Yingkui, Z.  Zhibo, (2011), “Strength Analysis of Diesel Engine Crankshaft Based on PRO/E and ANSYS” 
Third International. 
 
 
 
 
 
