 
1 
OTEKON 2016 
8. Otomotiv Teknolojileri Kongresi 
23 – 24 Mayıs 2016, BURSA 
 
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS OF OHV DIESEL ENGINE CAM 
PROFILE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
    The opening and closing angle of the valves, overlap, and maximum valve lift have a great effect on engine 
performance at a given speed. These parameters are controlled by the cam which consists of an area with a constant 
radius (base circle) and an area for valve lift (opening ramp, opening flank, cam tip, closing flank, and closing 
ramp).  The maximum valve lift, opening and closing angles are given by the results of a thermodynamic analysis 
to achieve the target engine performance. Kinematic and dynamic analysis are required to determine opening and 
closing ramps, flanks and cam tip shape to obtain a definitive cam profile. 
   In this paper, general design considerations of cam profile for the OHV diesel engines has been studied and 
a 4-cylinder and 4-stroke diesel off road engine exhaust cam profile has been designed by using AVL Excite 
Timing Drive. Following typical dynamic problems have direct influence on durability of the valve train system 
especially on high cam speeds; excessive valve seating and cam contact forces being occurred due to high velocity 
and acceleration, cam contact loss between follower and cam, valve bouncing and undesired vibration behavior of 
the valve springs. These problems can be detected by dynamic analysis results and avoided with an ideal cam 
profile design. 
 
Keywords: Cam Profile Design, Valvetrain, Dynamic Analysis, Excite Timing Drive 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Internal combustion engines use valves to 
control the air and fuel flow in/out of the cylinders. 
Valves are driven by the camshaft through the rocker 
arms, pushrods or tappet lifters according to type of 
the valve train system. Valve train systems are 
mainly subjected as 2 configurations by considering 
the location of the camshaft on engine layout which 
are Overhead Camshaft (OHC) and Overhead 
Valves (OHV). Figure – 1 shows the general layouts 
of the OHV and OHC valve train systems. Camshaft 
places in cylinder head of the engines on OHC 
configuration thus valves are driven in a more direct 
manner. Besides on OHV system the camshaft is 
placed within the cylinder block and uses pushrods 
or rods to actuate rocker arms through more number 
of the parts compared to OHC systems. Even though 
the cost and package advantages of the OHV 
engines, their valve train have lower stiffness and 
show much unsteady dynamic behavior due to high 
number of contact points and long distance for the 
transmission of the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
motion from camshaft to valves. Profile of the cam 
defines the theoretical valve motion however the 
actual valve motion does not occur in same geometry 
due to clearances, inertial and external forces and 
stiffness of the parts which is an actual conclusion of 
the dynamic behavior of the system. [1] 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Rocker arm valve train 
configurations 
 
Cam profile design is initiated with the 
kinematic calculations in order to provide a rough 
profile bconsidering given max valve lift from 
LÜTFEN BU ALANA YAZAR VE KURUM BİLGİSİ GİRMEYİNİZ! 
 
YAZAR VE KURUM BİLGİSİ FORM ÜZERİNDEN GİRİLMELİDİR. 
 
2 
thermodynamic calculations when the right valve 
train geometry (cam base circle, rocker arm ratio, 
sufficient stiffness of cams, package constraints, 
material and min. grinding wheel diameter that 
confirmed by the supplier) has been defined. As next 
step, the single valve train model is built for the 
dynamic analysis. 
2. VALVE KINEMATIC MOTION 
 
There must be a clearance between the valve 
actuating mechanism of the rocker arm and the valve 
stem end due to heat expansion of the valves and 
cylinder head and wear between valve head and 
valve seats during the engine operation. If there is no 
clearance left, the valves would not close on base 
circle during the engine operation which can lead 
performance loss or catastrophic failure of the 
engine.  Initially, when the valves start to move, the 
clearance between valve stem and rocker arm must 
be compensated. The valve clearance can be 
occurred either by turning and adjusting the bolts 
which is the connection between the pushrod and the 
rocker arm or with a hydraulic element which is 
closing the lash automatically. Diesel engines with 
OHV system are generally uses mechanical lash 
adjustments.  
When the lash is closed, the cam profile initiates 
a constant velocity at first section of the lift as protect 
the system from the impact forces which is called as 
ramp velocity.  
 
 
 
     Figure 2. Theoretical valve motion 
 
Under kinematic conditions the opening and 
closing ramp velocities are usually defined as 
between 300mm/s and 500mm/s for the diesel OHV 
engines at the rated engine speed. During the next 
stage the cam accelerates the valve which happens 
on the cam opening flank. The opening acceleration 
generally designs as immediate rise from zero to 
maximum and back to zero. Deceleration starts due 
to the spring stiffness is getting increased until the 
valve approaches the maximum lift. When the valve 
starts to close, acceleration is also controlled by the 
valve spring with the spring progressivity. Figure 3 
an example of exhaust valve spring progressivity. 
Last, final deceleration (closing ramp) is controlled 
by the cam. The cam is designed to give a constant 
closing velocity in order to limit the impact stresses 
same as opening ramp phase. [1] 
 
 
Figure 3. Valve spring progressivity 
 
3. GENERAL DESIGN    
CONSIDERATIONS 
 
3.1 Thermodynamic Input 
 
The cam lobe must be able to open and close the 
valve as far, as fast and as smoothly as possible.  
Thermodynamic side of the cam profile design deals 
with far and fast behavior of the valve motion in 
order to get maximum performance from the given 
engine layout. Flow coefficient versus valve lift and 
inner valve seat diameter is a main criteria for max. 
valve lift calculation. Thermodynamic delivers a 
proposal valve lift curve to design side in order to 
initiate the cam design.  
AVL Boost is a thermodynamic simulation 
software for the simulation of engine cycle and 
generation of initial proposal valve lift which 
simulates a wide variety of engines, 4-stroke or 2-
stroke, spark or auto-ignited. Applications range 
from small capacity engines for motorcycles or 
industrial purposes up to large engines for marine 
propulsion. In this study desired valve lift shape has 
already been defined by engine cycle calculations 
using AVL BOOST. This valve lift curve and the 
corresponding timing for the valves will targets for 
the basic cam design.[2]  
 
3.2 Cam Size Definition 
 
There are three basic limiting factors for the cam 
size definition. Contact pressure between cam and 
follower determines the wear of the contact surfaces. 
There is a small contact area is being created through 
 
3 
elastic deformation between cam and follower, 
thereby limiting the stresses considerably. This 
stress is called as Hertzian stress (contact stress). 
Maximum allowable Hertzian stress is limited 
depending on yield strength of the cam lobe or 
follower material and type of contact (point or line). 
Even though the contact stress is related with the 
velocity, lubrication and surface roughness of the 
mating parts, general cam size is directly affected by 
the maximum allowed Hertzian stress. Besides cam 
width over flank and nose is also depending on the 
material, follower type (flat, roller) and the contact 
stress limit. OHV engines generally use chilled cast 
camshaft and hardened steel flat tappets. This type of 
pair has typically 1000MPa Hertzian stress limit 
however detailed evaluation has to be done by 
simulation in combination with other parameters as 
lubrication etc. 
    As the cam size is reduced, another design 
parameter, radius of curvature is affected. Figure 4. 
shows a cam shape example with the negative cam 
contour radius. The cam surface radius of curvature 
will have a minimum allowable design value that 
will satisfy the other design factors. Generally, 
negative cam contour radius is defined by the 
manufacturer depending on tooling costs. 
 
            
 
                Figure 4. Negative cam contour 
 
    Shaft size is another limiting factor in 
determining the minimum cam size. The camshaft is 
subject to torsional vibrations. The shaft diameter is 
determined by the requirement for adequate torsional 
stiffness. The required shaft outside diameter is 
depending, whether the shaft is driving other 
components besides the valves. This is important if 
it is driving components with high torque 
fluctuations (such as unit fuel injectors) or 
components with high inertia.[3] 
 
4. CAM PROFILE DYNAMIC 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 
   Valve train components must satisfy a number 
of dynamic requirements such as valve closing 
velocity, valve spring behavior, cam/follower 
contact stress and there is no loss of contact should 
be occurred between the frictionally coupled 
components up continuous over speed in order to 
keep the target valve train durability and avoid from 
the failures. 
   Excessive valve closing velocity which also 
refers as impact velocity has direct influence on 
valve/ valve seat wear and thermal fatigue cracks. So 
that it should be limited under a certain value on 
lower and higher speeds by the optimization of the 
cam profile. Typically max. Valve closing velocity 
is 0.5m/s on rated speeds for OHV diesel engines. It 
can be allowed bit higher on continues or non-
continues over speeds.  
   Valve 
bouncing 
is 
another 
important 
parameter which should be avoided. This problem 
reduces engine efficiency and performance and 
potentially increases engine emissions. There are 
also significant risks to valve spring cracks and 
piston valve contacts.  
   Main functions of the valve spring are closing 
the valves with the potential energy stored during the 
valve opening phase by the force through the cam 
lobe and keeping the valves closed. On the other 
hand valve spring has key role to control the valve 
train dynamic forces. The spring forces has to be 
higher than the mass forces of moving parts to ensure 
permanent contact between cam and follower.  Valve 
spring dynamic response (Forces) has to be checked 
in the entire speed range in 50rpm steps. It generally 
occurs on high engine speeds due to high valve 
closing acceleration and improper valve spring 
stiffness characteristics.  
As mentioned in cam size definition, contact 
pressure is limited according to material pair of the 
parts  between cam and followers. And maximum 
contact stress should be under allowable max contact 
stress limit in every operation speed of the engine. 
[4] 
5. BASIC CAM DESIGN 
 
In this study, a desired valve lift shape has 
already been defined by engine cycle calculations 
using AVL BOOST. This valve lift curve and the 
corresponding timing for the valves are targets for 
the basic cam design. Thermodynamic exhaust valve 
lift is used as an input for initial cam design whereas 
maximum valve lift has been defined as 10mm with 
considering the mechanical lash.  
AVL EXCITE Timing Drive provides a tool for 
basic cam design and cam modification which is 
used for the current study. The basic cam design 
module is included in the timing drive software for 
preparation of a first cam profile layout at an early 
design stage. For this example an exhaust cam 
profile for a valve train with overhead valve is 
generated. Detailed model can be seen on dynamic 
analysis section.  
Before designing the cam profile, it is necessary 
to prepare an equivalent system. This system should 
define the most important geometrical dimensions 
and some initial values for the following: 
 
4 
 
- 
Valve train stiffness which are calculated 
considering young modulus of the materials 
and the geometry of the components. 
- 
The masses of the valve train components 
- 
The initial properties of the valve spring 
which is already defined per max valve lift, 
exhaust back pressure and valve train 
geometry. Valve spring design is an 
iterative study. Spring designer uses the 
valve train dynamic analysis results again 
to reach the optimum spring properties. 
Table 1. shows individual masses and stiffness’s 
of the valve train components which are used for the 
cam design and dynamic analysis. 
 
 
Table 1. Valve train masses 
 
mass 
[g] 
stiffness 
[N/mm] 
valve_ex_all 
120.2 
 
valve_ex face 
92.3 
 
valve_ex stem 
31.1 
128629 
valve spring retainer 
41.6 
 
valve collet pair 
2.5 
 
valve spring non active coil 
mass 
11.5 
 
half pushrod UPPER 
46.7 
744482 
half pushrod LOWER 
42.4 
74448 
flat tappet 
140.2 
4433415 
rocker arm 
186.8 
 
adjustment screw 
11.1 
 
adjustment screw nut 
3.5 
 
rocker arm incl. adj. screw, 
nut 
200.5 
 
 
For the basic cam design, three principle 
methods are available:  
 
- 
Polydyne cams  
- 
Steady acceleration cams  
- 
Section-wise description of the cam profile  
The cam design is done interactively by 
specifying a section to be modified and giving a rule 
how the cam contour should be modified. 
Afterwards, modifications can be performed in lift, 
velocity, and acceleration curves at valve or cam 
considering the requirements.  Polydyne method 
symmetric for both opening and closing side is used. 
Ramps (opening and closing) of the cam profile 
should be determined accordingly to general cam 
shape design. Ramps are considered at the cam 
profile for all types of valve trains, they serve for 
achieving defined opening and closing behavior of 
the valve and compensate clearance and the stiffness 
of the valve train. Ramp definition is independent 
calculation other than cam design methods. So that, 
all available ramp description can be combined with 
all described design methods for main cams. 
As this example is to prepare data for a 
mechanical valve train with a clearance of 0.25 mm 
at cold engine, a height of the opening ramp of 0.35 
mm is considered.  
Then according to stiffness, mass, valve train 
geometry and thermodynamic data, cam design is 
generated. Figure 5. shows, results of the kinematic 
valve lift, velocity and acceleration shape. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Kinematic valve lift, velocity and 
acceleration 
 
6. DYNAMIC ANALYSIS 
 
6.1 Model Description 
 
After the basic cam design has been done, the 
according rough model is extended and refined to a 
model which can be used for the calculation of the 
dynamic behavior of the system. 
In the current example, simple single OHV 
exhaust valve train actuated by pushrod and rocker 
arm with a mechanical tappet of a four cylinder off 
road diesel engine has been studied as described in 
figure 6. 
 
In general it consists of: 
 
- 
Cam 
- 
Mechanical tappet 
- 
Pushrod 
- 
Rocker Arm 
- 
Valve(head and stem) 
- 
Valve spring 
- 
Valve cotter and retainer 
 
5 
 
Figure 6. OHV Valve train layout 
 
OHV system of a four cylinder off road diesel 
engine is modelled as a single valve train lumped 
mass system using AVL EXCITE Timing Drive as 
shown in the figure 7. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Valve train lumped mass model 
 
The lumped mass model is generated by 
considering below road map; 
 
- 
Divide the valve into two parts for the 
purpose of considering the stiffness and 
damping of the valve more precisely. The 
valve is usually “cut” in the middle of the 
stem. Thus, the following two parts are 
taken into consideration: Valve Stem and 
Valve Face 
- 
Masses of the valve cotter, retainer, and the 
valve-side non-active coils of the spring(s) 
are also added to the pure stem mass as well 
when considering the valve stem mass. 
- 
One element (spring model) represents the 
valve spring. 
- 
Radial and axial bearings describe the 
connection 
(stiffness 
and 
damping) 
between a shaft or a gear with surrounding 
parts. In our example, the radial and axial 
bearings mainly represents the stiffness of 
the camshaft.  
- 
Pushrod is considered with two stiffness 
and damping elements for more precise 
representation since its long height. 
- 
Directly a rocker arm element is used for 
the exhaust OHV rocker arm. 
- 
Flat tappet (cam follower) is described with 
single stiffness and damping element. 
- 
Camshaft is modelled in shaft modeler tool 
as 2 bearing and single exhaust cam lobe. 
All the related geometries (cam lobe width, 
cam lobe base circle diameter, bearing 
width and diameter and camshaft length) 
are considered in order to describe the part.  
The calculations are conducted for the 1800 rpm 
engine speed which equals to 900 rpm camshaft 
speed. Cylinder pressure, friction of the elements, 
stiffness and damping values derived from the part 
geometries and masses, dynamic oil viscosity 
between shaft and bearings, spring properties are 
used in the model. 
The method programmed in the dynamic part of 
EXCITE Timing Drive calculates the dynamic 
displacements, velocities, accelerations, and forces 
in the valve train elements.  
 
6.2 Results 
 
After the calculation is finished the results files 
are evaluated according to valve train dynamic 
requirements. Initially, valve lift profile and valve 
velocity are compared at 1800 rpm. The dynamic 
valve lift curve can differ more or less from the 
kinematic curve, depending on the stiffness of the 
valve train. So that max valve lift has been observed 
as 9.91mm due to elastic deformation of the valve 
train parts without considering the valve mechanical 
lash. On the other hand valve lift is smoothly 
matching with the thermodynamic lift curve 
however it’s needed to be double check from the 
engine performance effect point of view. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Figure 8. Dynamic valve lift and valve velocity 
results @ 1800 rpm 
 
By the smooth design of the cam opening and 
closing ramps, it produced a relatively low valve 
closing velocity on 1800 rpm which is below than 
recommended value of 0.5m/s. 
 
 
Figure 9. Valve closing velocity @ 1800 rpm 
 
Dynamic spring shows no contact of spring coils 
according to comparison of the active coil forces. 
 
 
Figure 10. Spring Coil Forces 
 
7. CONCLUSION 
 
The single exhaust valve train of an OHV diesel 
engine is simulated by means of AVL EXCITE 
Timing Drive. The study shows that typical dynamic 
problems can be avoided by reaching to optimum 
design of the cam profile or other valve train 
components like rocker and spring. 
 
The results of analysis are: 
 
- 
Dynamic valve seat velocity and forces 
- 
Dynamic valve lift 
- 
Dynamic behavior of valve springs are 
satisfy the dynamic requirements of the 
valve train.  
Finally, the analysis is performed on rated speed 
of the engine which is well below than continuous 
over speed (2600rpm). Dynamic behavior of the 
valve train shows severe results on higher engine 
speeds so that likely some refinements will be 
needed on cam design on further design studies for 
higher rpm’s. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. R. Lewis, R. S. Dwyer-Joyce, (2003), 
“Automotive Engine Valve Recession”, 
Professional 
Engineering 
Publishing 
Limited, London and Bury St Edmunds, 
UK 
2. H. A. ROTHBART, (2004), “Cam Design 
Handbook”, McGraw-Hill  
3. BOSCH, 
(2001), 
“Automotive 
Handbook” John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
4. M. Mehrgou, N. Hadley, V. D’Olier, 
(2009), “Optimization of a Heavy Duty 
Diesel Engine Cam Profiles to Eliminate 
Contact Loss using Multi-body Dynamic 
Model”, SAE 
 
 
 
