Dynamic analysis of loads and
stresses in connecting rods
P S Shenoy and A Fatemi
Department of Mechanical, Industrial, and Manufacturing Engineering, The University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA
The manuscript was received on 25 June 2005 and was accepted after revision for publication on 6 February 2006.
DOI: 10.1243/09544062JMES105
Abstract: Automobile internal combustion engine connecting rod is a high volume production
component subjected to complex loading. Proper optimization of this component, which is
critical to the engine fuel efﬁciency and more vigorously pursued by the automotive industry
in recent years, necessitates a detailed understanding of the applied loads and resulting stresses
under in-service conditions. In this study, detailed load analysis under service loading con-
ditions was performed for a typical connecting rod, followed by quasi-dynamic ﬁnite element
analysis (FEA) to capture stress variations over a cycle of operation. On the basis of the resulting
stress-time histories, variation of stress ratio, presence of mean and bending stresses, and multi-
axiality of stress states in various locations of the connecting rod under service operating con-
ditions were investigated. It was found that even though connecting rods are typically tested and
analyzed under axial loading and stress state, bending stresses are signiﬁcant and a multiaxial
stress state exists at the critical regions of connecting rod. A comparison is also made between
stresses obtained using static FEA which is commonly performed and stresses using quasi-
dynamic FEA. It is shown that considerable differences in obtained stresses exist between the
two sets of analyses.
Keywords: connecting rod load analysis, connecting rod stress analysis
1
INTRODUCTION
Automobile internal combustion engine connecting
rod is a high volume production critical component.
It connects reciprocating piston to rotating crank-
shaft, transmitting the thrust of piston to crankshaft,
and is subjected to complex loading. It undergoes
high cyclic loads of the order of 108–109 cycles,
which range from high compressive loads because
of combustion, to high tensile loads because of
inertia. Therefore, durability of this component is
of critical importance. Usually, the worst case load
is considered in the design process. Literature
review suggests that investigators [1, 2] use maxi-
mum inertia load as one extreme load corresponding
to the tensile load and compressive gas load produ-
cing maximum torque as the other extreme design
load corresponding to the compressive load. In
recent years, more emphasis has been placed on
higher vehicle fuel efﬁciency. Optimization of con-
necting rods in an engine is critical to fuel efﬁciency.
Proper optimization of this component, however,
necessitates a detailed understanding of the applied
loads
and
resulting
stresses
under
in-service
conditions.
Inertia load is a time-varying quantity and can
refer to inertia load of the connecting rod or of the
piston assembly. Questions are naturally raised in
light of such complex structural behaviour such as:
Does the peak load at the ends of a connecting rod
represent the worst case loading? Under the effects
of bending and axial loads, can one expect higher
stresses than that experienced under axial load
alone? Moreover, very little information is available
in the literature on bending stiffness requirements,
or on the magnitude of bending and multiaxial
stresses.
Webster et al. [2] performed three-dimensional
ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) of a high-speed diesel
Corresponding author: Department of Mechanical, Industrial,
and Manufacturing Engineering, The University of Toledo, 2801
W. Bancroft St, Toledo, OH 43606, USA. email: afatemi@
eng.utoledo.edu
615
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
engine connecting rod. They used maximum com-
pressive load which was measured experimentally,
and maximum tensile load which is essentially the
inertia load of piston assembly mass in their analysis.
Load distributions on the piston pin end and crank
end were also determined experimentally. Ishida
et al. [3] measured stress variation at the column
center and column bottom of connecting rod, as
well as bending stress at the column center. From
their study it was observed that at high engine
speeds, the maximum stress in connecting rod
column bottom does not occur at the top dead
center. It was also observed that the stress ratio
varies with location, and at a given location it varies
with engine speed. The maximum bending stress
over one engine cycle at the column center was
found to be about 25 per cent of the maximum
stress at that location.
Another
study
used
FEA
with
applied
loads
including bolt tightening load, piston pin interfer-
ence load, compressive gas load, and tensile inertia
load [4]. On the basis of the stress and strain
measurements performed on connecting rod, close
agreement was found with loads predicted by inertia
theory. The study indicated that stresses in a con-
necting rod due to bending loads are substantial,
and that buckling and bending stiffness are import-
ant design factors that must be taken into account
during the design process.
Balasubramaniam et al. [1] used the various indi-
vidual loads acting on connecting rod for performing
simulation and obtaining stress distribution by
superposition. The loading consisted of inertia load,
ﬁring load, press ﬁt of the bearing shell, and bolt
forces. Athavale and Sajanpawar [5] also modelled
the inertia load in their ﬁnite element (FE) model.
An interface software was developed to apply the
acceleration load to elements on the connecting
rod depending upon their location, as acceleration
varies in magnitude and direction with location on
the connecting rod. They ﬁxed the ends of the con-
necting rod to determine its deﬂection and stresses.
This, however, may not be representative of the
pinned joints that exist in a connecting rod. The con-
necting rod was separately analysed for tensile load
due to piston assembly mass (piston inertia), and
for compressive load due to gas pressure. The effect
of inertia load due to mass of the connecting rod
was also analysed separately. Pai [6] presented an
approach to optimize the shape of the connecting
rod subjected to a load cycle consisting of inertia
load deduced from gas load as one extreme, and
peak inertia load exerted by piston assembly mass
as the other extreme and used fatigue life as the
optimization constraint.
In this study, a detailed load analysis under service
loading conditions was performed for a typical forged
steel connecting rod, followed by quasi-dynamic
FEA to capture stress variation over a cycle of oper-
ation. Such stress analysis under realistic operating
loads is critical to any durability or optimization
study of a connecting rod and is vastly different
from the typical uniaxial testing and static analysis
commonly conducted for this component. This is
because, in a typical static analysis, the loads acting
at the two ends of the connecting rod are equal in
magnitude and are in static equilibrium. On the
other hand, in a quasi-dynamic analysis, the loads
at the two ends need not be equal and the connecting
rod is in equilibrium at any instant in time, only when
the inertia load resulting from angular velocity and
acceleration (both translational and angular) are
accounted
for.
Therefore,
although
the
quasi-
dynamic analyses are repeated at different time
points, they are based on time-varying dynamic
input data. For this reason, the analysis is referred
to as ‘quasi-dynamic’. Details of the dynamic load
analysis are discussed in the next section. Optimiz-
ation aspects and fatigue behaviour of the connecting
rod are investigated in references [7, 8], respectively.
In this article, FE modelling aspects, resulting
stress-time
histories,
variation
of
stress
ratio,
presence of mean and bending stresses, and multi-
axiality of stress states in various locations of the
connecting rod under service operating conditions
are discussed. A comparison is also made between
results obtained using static FEA commonly per-
formed, and results using quasi-dynamic FEA repre-
senting more realistic service operating conditions.
2
LOAD ANALYSIS
Engine conﬁguration to which the typical connecting
rod investigated belongs is shown in Table 1 and
piston pressure versus crank angle diagram used in
the analysis is shown in Fig. 1. With these data and
using commercial software such as ADAMS and
I-DEAS, angular velocity and angular acceleration
of the connecting rod, as well as linear accelerations
of the connecting rod crank end center and of the
center of gravity (CG) can be obtained. Variations
of these quantities during one engine cycle can be
Table 1
Conﬁguration of the engine to which the
connecting rod belongs
Crankshaft radius (mm)
48.5
Connecting rod length (mm)
141
Piston diameter (mm)
86
Mass of the piston assembly (kg)
0.434
Mass of the connecting rod (kg)
0.439
Izz about the center of gravity (kg m2)
0.00144
Distance of CG from crank-end centre (mm)
36.4
Maximum gas pressure (bar)
37.3
616
P S Shenoy and A Fatemi
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
obtained as a function of any of the engine para-
meters listed in Table 1, as well as any engine speed.
Figure 2 shows variation of angular velocity and
angular acceleration over one complete engine
cycle at the maximum engine speed of 5700 r/min,
using the data listed in Table 1 and piston pressure
plot of Fig. 1. Variations of angular velocity and
angular acceleration from 08 to 3608 are identical
to their variations from 3608 to 7208.
On the basis of the velocities and accelerations
obtained, inertia load and reaction forces at the
connecting rod ends can then be generated for differ-
ent engine speeds. At any point of time during the
engine cycle, forces calculated at the ends form
the external loads, whereas inertia load forms the
internal load acting on the connecting rod. These
result in a set of completely equilibrated external
and internal loads.
Stress at a point on the connecting rod as it under-
goes a cycle consists of two components, a bending
stress component and an axial stress component.
The
bending
stress
depends
on
the
bending
moment, which is a function of load at the CG
normal to the connecting rod longitudinal axis, as
well as angular and linear acceleration components
normal to this axis. Variation of each of these three
quantities over 08–3608 is identical to the variation
over 3608–7208 (see Fig. 2 for variations of angular
velocity and acceleration). Therefore, for any given
point on the connecting rod, the bending moment
varies in an identical fashion between 08 and 3608
crank angle as it varies between 3608 and 7208
crank angle. The axial load variation, however, does
not follow the same cycle of repetitive pattern, as
one cycle of axial load variation consists of the
entire 7208 crank angle. This is because of the vari-
ation in gas load, one cycle of which consists of
7208 crank angle.
Figure 3 shows variations of forces acting at
the crank end (Fig. 3(a)), as well as the piston pin
end (Fig. 3(b)). The positive axial load at the crank
end is the compressive load in the ﬁgure due to the
co-ordinate system used (as shown on the con-
necting rod in Fig. 3). A similar analysis was per-
formed at other engine speeds (i.e. 4000 r/min and
2000 r/min). The results indicated that as the speed
increases, the tensile load increases, whereas the
maximum
compressive
load
at
the
crank
end
decreases. However, although this results in a reduc-
tion of the compressive mean load, load range or
amplitude increases only slightly with the increasing
engine speed. Effect of engine speed on produced
stresses is further discussed in section 4.
The maximum compressive load is the load cor-
responding to the peak gas pressure, and Fig. 1
indicates that it occurs at about 228 crank angle.
Axial component of this load, which is essentially
a static load (where loads at the crank and pin
ends are the same), is the design compressive
load for the connecting rod. This compressive
load acts between the centre of crank end and
piston pin end of the connecting rod. Virtually no
load acts on the crank end cap under the compres-
sive load.
It should be noted that piston pressure versus
crank angle diagram can change with speed. The
actual change will be unique to an engine. Pressure
versus crank angle diagram at different speeds for
the engine under consideration was not available.
Therefore, the same diagram was used for different
engine speeds. However, from a plot showing the
effect of speed on P–V diagram at constant delivery
ratio reported in Ferguson [9], very small change in
the peak gas pressure was observed at different
speeds, though a change of nearly 10 per cent was
observed at lower pressures. Delivery ratio is the
ratio of entering or delivered air mass, to ideal air
mass at ambient density.
Load ratio (ratio of minimum to maximum load) at
the crank end based on peak compressive load at
peak gas pressure and peak tensile load in Fig. 3(a)
Fig. 1
Piston pressure versus crank angle diagram
used to calculate forces at the connecting rod
ends
Fig. 2
Variations of angular velocity and angular
acceleration of the connecting rod over one
complete engine cycle at a crankshaft speed of
5700 r/min
Dynamic analysis of loads and stresses in connecting rods
617
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
is 21.23. At the piston pin end, based on the same
peak compressive load as for the crank end but
peak tensile load from Fig. 3(b), load ratio is 22.31.
Therefore, load ratio varies over the length of the
connecting rod. As a result, fatigue testing at different
load ratios is often conducted in order to test differ-
ent regions of the connecting rod [10].
It should be noted that the analysis presented
assumes
that
the
crank
rotates
at
a
constant
angular velocity. Therefore, angular acceleration
of the crank is not included in the analysis. How-
ever, when forces at the ends of the connecting
rod in a similar engine conﬁguration under con-
ditions of crankshaft acceleration and deceleration
(acceleration
of
6000 r/s2
and
deceleration
of
700 r/s2) were compared with forces under constant
crankshaft speed, the difference was found to be less
than 1 per cent.
3
FE MODELLING OF THE CONNECTING ROD
In order to capture the structural behaviour of the
connecting rod under service operating conditions,
quasi-dynamic FEA was performed. An FE model
mesh with about 105 parabolic tetrahedral elements,
with uniform global element length of 1.5 mm and
local element length of 1 mm at locations with
Fig. 3
Axial, normal, and resultant forces at the connecting rod ends at crank speed
of 5700 r/min. (a) Forces at the crank end. (b) Forces at the piston-pin end
618
P S Shenoy and A Fatemi
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
chamfers,
was
used.
As
a
connecting
rod
is
designed for very long life, stresses are in the elastic
range, and as a result linear elastic analysis was
conducted.
While performing quasi-dynamic FEA of the con-
necting rod, external loads computed from the load
analysis discussed in section 2 were applied to both
the crank end and the piston pin end of the connect-
ing rod. Many FE models were solved, each model
with the applied loads obtained from the load analy-
sis at the crank angle of interest. Therefore, as indi-
cated earlier, such analysis is different from a static
analysis as the time-varying dynamic nature of the
loading represented by load variation at different
crank angles is accounted for. It should also be
noted that the dynamic load analysis step was
required as a separate step, as input to the stress
analysis step using IDEAS. This is because, although
commonly available commercial software are typi-
cally capable of providing stresses as output from
dynamic input loads (i.e. gas pressure and inertia)
they are not capable of determining the dynamic
loads. Time-varying dynamic loads were determined
from multi-body dynamic analysis using ADAMS,
based on the crank revolutions per minute, piston
gas pressure (which varies with time or crank
angle), and mass properties of the connecting rod.
Combining
the
two
analyses
(i.e.
multi-body
dynamics and FE stress analyses) into a single step
requires immense computational power to develop
FE models of the entire system, which may become
available in the future with the rapidly increasing
computing power.
If the component of the resultant force along the
connecting rod length suggested a tensile load to
act on the connecting rod, the resultant load was
applied with cosine distribution, based on exper-
imental results [2]. The cosine distribution was
applied 908 on either side of the direction of the
resultant load, totally 1808. But if the component
of the resultant force along the connecting rod
length suggested a compressive load to act on the
connecting rod, the resultant load was applied with
uniform distribution [2]. The uniformly distributed
load was applied 608 on either side of the direction
of the resultant load, totally 1208 on the contact
surface.
The application of boundary condition is illus-
trated in Fig. 4, for a random crank angle of 4328.
The computed direction of the resultant load at the
crank end is 73.18. Therefore, 1208 of the surface of
the crank end (608 on either side of this direction)
carries a uniformly distributed load. The direction
of the resultant load at the piston pin end is 39.48.
Therefore, 1208 of the surface of the pin end carries
a uniformly distributed load. As the axial com-
ponents of the loads are compressive, loads were
applied
with
uniform
distribution,
rather
than
cosine distribution.
Stresses in the regions near the ends of the con-
necting rod are sensitive to the type of load distri-
bution applied (uniformly distributed or cosine
distribution). Away from these regions however, for
example at the crank end transition to the shank
(typical critical or failure region), stresses differ
only by 7 per cent at the crank angle of 4328, when
Fig. 4
Illustration of the way in which boundary conditions were applied when solving the
quasi-dynamic FEA model. The illustration is for a crank angle of 4328
Dynamic analysis of loads and stresses in connecting rods
619
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
load
distribution
is
changed
from
cosine
to
uniformly distributed load.
To
account
for
the
dynamic
motion
of
the
connecting rod and the resulting inertia loads, the
acceleration boundary conditions were imposed.
Translational acceleration in the direction of the
crank towards the crank center, angular velocity,
and angular acceleration were imposed on the con-
necting rod. The crank end center was speciﬁed as
the center of rotation.
A way to simulate the pin joint is to apply all the
loads acting on the connecting rod that keeps the
connecting rod in dynamic equilibrium at the instant
under consideration (i.e. at a speciﬁc crank angle)
and then solve the model. The FE model was solved
by eliminating the rigid body motion, achieved by
specifying kinematics degrees of freedom, and speci-
fying elimination of rigid body motion while solving,
as opposed to applying restraints. Not applying
restraints and using loads at both ends of the con-
necting rod permits better representation of the
loads transferred through the pin joints.
4
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION OF STRESS
ANALYSIS
A few geometric locations were identiﬁed on the con-
necting rod at which stresses were traced over the
entire load cycle to obtain the stress-time history.
Some of these locations are shown in Fig. 5 and
include high stressed regions of the crank end
(locations 5, 10, and 11) the pin end at the oil hole
(locations 6 and 7), the shank (locations 8 and 9),
and at transitions to the shank at the crank and
piston pin ends (locations 1, 2, 3, and 4). Locations
1, 3, 6, 8, and 10 are symmetrically located from
locations 2, 4, 7, 9, and 11, respectively, with respect
to the centerline of the connecting rod. The points
selected
cover
the
typical
critical
(i.e.
failure)
locations of connecting rod [8].
Figures 6 and 7 show the stress-time histories for
the shank region (locations 1, 2, 8, and 9) as well as
the transitions of the shank to the crank and pin
ends (locations 3, 4, 10, and 11) at a crank speed of
5700 r/min. von Mises stress variation under service
loading condition is also plotted. The von Mises
stress carries the sign of the principal stress that
has the maximum absolute value. Clearly, not one
instant of time can be identiﬁed as the time at
which all the points on the connecting rod experi-
ence the maximum state of stress. However, the
stress-time histories indicate that all the critical
locations identiﬁed in Fig. 5 undergo maximum ten-
sile stress at the crank angle of 3608, except locations
2 and 9 where the maximum stress occurs at the
crank angle of 3488. The transitions to the crank
and pin ends are the critical regions with high tensile
stresses. In the shank region, the compressive stress
is higher in magnitude than the tensile stress. There-
fore, adequate buckling strength is also required.
To design against fatigue failure, some investi-
gators have used the overall operating load range of
the connecting rod (i.e. load range comprised the
maximum static tensile and compressive loads),
whereas others have used the load range at the maxi-
mum power output. This is illustrated with reference
to location 8 and Fig. 6. At this location, the overall
operating stress range obtained using the overall
load range is 244 MPa (i.e. from 2160 MPa due to
the maximum gas pressure to 84 MPa from Fig. 6).
However, the stress range at the maximum speed
for this location is 157 MPa (i.e. from 273 to
84 MPa in Fig. 6), representing a 36 per cent decrease
(when compared with 244 MPa) in the stress range.
A 36 per cent change in the stress range or amplitude
can result in more than an order of magnitude
change in the fatigue life. Therefore, using the overall
operating load range can lead to an overly conserva-
tive design of the component.
The tensile load increases as the engine speed
increases as evident from Fig. 8, which shows a plot
Fig. 5
Locations on the connecting rod where the stress variation was traced over one
complete cycle of the engine
620
P S Shenoy and A Fatemi
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
of stress variation at location 8 with engine speed.
The tensile stress increases as the speed increases,
as an increase of the inertia load due to the piston
mass results in increasing the tensile load on the
connecting rod. Note that the tensile load consists
of both structural load and acceleration load due
to inertia. An important observation from Fig. 8 is
that even though maximum and mean stresses
increase with increasing engine speed, the stress
range (or amplitude, as amplitude is half the range)
is independent of speed, as it remains constant.
The stress range or amplitude is the primary stress
controlling fatigue design of the connecting rod,
whereas mean stress has a secondary inﬂuence.
Connecting rods in the engine are usually tested
with a load sequence typically consisting of different
engine speeds [10].
An aspect of dynamic loading is the bending stress
it produces and its signiﬁcance. As noted earlier,
the locations speciﬁed in Fig. 5 are symmetric
with respect to the centerline of the component.
A difference between stresses at the symmetric
locations in the stress-time history plots (Figs 6 and
7) indicates the presence of bending stress, the mag-
nitude of which is equal to half the difference. For
example, the maximum bending stress is 26 per
cent of the maximum stress at the section through
location 8, and 22 per cent of the maximum stress
at the section through location 1 (Fig. 6). The shift
in the peak stress between points 8 and 9 in Fig. 6
is because of the bending stress. This suggests that
the bending stiffness in the shank needs to be ade-
quate to sustain these bending stresses. Bending
stiffness as an important design factor has also
been suggested in reference [4].
Another important observation that can be made
from the stress-time histories in Figs 6 and 7 is
that, however, the state of stress is predominantly
uniaxial for some locations, it is multiaxial at other
locations such as 6, 7, 10, and 11. Figure 7 indicates
that at locations 10 and 11 the stress component sy
is as high as 30 per cent of the stress component sx
Fig. 6
Stress variation over the engine cycle in the shank region (locations 1, 2, 8, and 9) at
5700 r/min. XX is the sx component of stress
Dynamic analysis of loads and stresses in connecting rods
621
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
at the crank angle of 3608, which is signiﬁcant. The
stress multiaxiality is proportional (or in-phase),
and results from stress concentrations such as in
locations 10 and 11. Equivalent stress approach
based on von Mises criterion is commonly used for
multiaxial proportional stresses to compute equival-
ent stress amplitude, sqa.
For multiaxial mean stresses, it has been observed
that mean shear stress does not affect cyclic bending
or cyclic torsion fatigue behaviours, whereas mean
hydrostatic stress inﬂuences fatigue life [11, 12]. As
a result, using the following equation, which is insen-
sitive to the mean shear stress, but accounts for
mean hydrostatic stress can be used to compute an
equivalent mean stress, sqm, based on individual
mean stress components smx, smy, and smz
sqm ¼ smx þ smy þ smz
(1)
This equation also captures the beneﬁcial effect of
the compressive residual stresses produced through
the common practice of surface peening of connect-
ing rods, as residual stresses can be treated as mean
stresses in fatigue analysis.
The stress ratio (minimum to maximum stress
ratio), and therefore mean stress, varies not only
with location in the connecting rod, but also with
engine speed at a location. For example, for location
8 shown in Fig. 8, the stress ratio changes from 219
at 2000 r/min to 21 at 5700 r/min. The combination
of tensile mean stress and stress amplitude results
in higher fatigue damage at locations 2, 4, and 9,
as compared with the corresponding symmetric
locations 1, 3, and 8, respectively. To account for
the mean stress, completely reversed von Mises
equivalent stress amplitude, Sf, can be computed
based on the commonly used modiﬁed Goodman
equation
sqa
Sf
þ sqm
Su
¼ 1
(2)
where Su is the ultimate tensile strength of the
material [12].
5
COMPARISON OF QUASI-DYNAMIC
AND STATIC ANALYSES
Most investigators have used static axial loads for the
design, analysis, and testing of connecting rods. In
this study, FEA was also carried out under axial
static load to compare the results with the more
realistic quasi-dynamic analysis results discussed in
section 4. Quasi-dynamic FEA results differ from
the static FEA results because of the time-varying
inertia load of the connecting rod, which is respon-
sible for inducing bending stresses and varying
axial load along the length, as discussed earlier.
Fig. 7
Stress variation over the engine cycle at the
transitions to the pin end (locations 3 and 4)
and to the crank end (locations 10 and 11) at
5700 r/min. XX is the sx component of stress,
YY is the sy component of stress, XY is the
txy component of stress, and XZ is the txz
component of stress
Fig. 8
Minimum stress, maximum stress, mean stress,
and stress range at location 8 on the connecting
rod as a function of engine speed
622
P S Shenoy and A Fatemi
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
The static FEA model is shown in Fig. 9. Note that,
undertensilestaticload,halfofthepistonpininnersur-
face(1808) is completely restrained. Similarly, whenthe
connecting rod is under axial compressive load, 1208 of
contact surface area is totally restrained. The stress
range used for fatigue design based on a static analysis
is obtained from the difference between the maximum
stress corresponding to the maximum static tensile
load, and the minimum stress corresponding to the
maximum static compressive load.
Figure 10 compares the equivalent von Mises
stress amplitudes (i.e. Sf from equation 2) for the
different locations identiﬁed in Fig. 6 obtained from
static as well as quasi-dynamic analyses. As can be
seen from this ﬁgure, the stress amplitude based on
the static analysis is higher at all locations. The differ-
ence is about a factor of two at some locations,
including typical failure locations at 3 and 4. Such a
difference in stress amplitude results in orders of
magnitude difference in fatigue lives. Therefore,
static analysis of a connecting rod can yield unrealis-
tic stresses, whereas quasi-dynamic analysis pro-
vides more accurate results better suited for fatigue
design and/or optimization of this high volume pro-
duction component.
6
CONCLUSIONS
The following conclusions can be drawn from this
study.
1. Static analysis of a connecting rod that is typically
performed can yield unrealistic stresses, whereas
quasi-dynamic analysis provides more accurate
results better suited for fatigue design and optim-
ization analysis of this high volume production
component.
2. Using the overall operating load range of the con-
necting rod which comprises the maximum static
tensile and compressive loads, rather than the
load range at the maximum power output, can
lead to an overly conservative design of the
component.
3. Maximum and mean stresses increase with increas-
ing engine speed because of the increase in the iner-
tia load. The stress range (or amplitude), however, is
independent of the engine speed.
4. The load ratio or the mean load varies over the
length of the connecting rod. The stress ratio
and
therefore
mean
stress,
also
varies
with
location in the connecting rod, as well as with
engine speed at a location.
5. The bending stress produced as a result of
dynamic loading is signiﬁcant and bending stiff-
ness in the shank should be considered as an
important design factor.
6. In spite of the fact that typical testing and analysis
of connecting rod is conducted under uniaxial
stress state, the state of stress is multiaxial at criti-
cal locations and mainly results from stress con-
centrations.
The
use
of
an
equivalent
stress approach is necessary to account for the
stress multiaxiality.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) is
acknowledged for providing ﬁnancial support for
this study. Dr M. Pourazady of the University of
Toledo helped with the quasi-dynamic FEA in this
work and his help is appreciated.
REFERENCES
1 Balasubramaniam, B., Svoboda, M., and Bauer, W.
Structural optimization of I.C. engines subjected to
mechanical and thermal loads. Comput. Meth. Appl.
Mech. Engrg, 1991, 89, 337–360.
Fig. 9
FEA model of the connecting rod with static
tensile load at the crank end with cosine
distribution over 1808 and piston pin end fully
restrained over 1808
Fig. 10
Comparison of equivalent von Mises stress
amplitudes under static and quasi-dynamic
loading conditions
Dynamic analysis of loads and stresses in connecting rods
623
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
2 Webster, W.D., Coffell, R., and Alfaro, D. A three
dimensional ﬁnite element analysis of a high speed
diesel engine connecting rod. SAE Technical Paper
831322, 1983.
3 Ishida, S., Hori, Y., Kinoshita, T., and Iwamoto, T.
Development of technique to measure stress on connect-
ing rod during ﬁring operation. SAE Technical Paper
951797, 1995, pp. 1851–1856.
4 Rice,
R.
C.
(Ed.)
SAE
Fatigue
design
handbook,
3rd edition, 1997 (Society of Automotive Engineers,
Warrendale, PA).
5 Athavale, S. and Sajanpawar, P. R. Studies on some
modelling aspects in the ﬁnite element analysis of
small gasoline engine components. Proceedings of the
small engine technology conference, Society of Automo-
tive Engineers of Japan, Tokyo, 1991, pp. 379–389.
6 Pai, C. L. The shape optimization of a connecting rod
with fatigue life constraint. Int. J. Mater. Prod. Technol.,
1996, 11(5–6), 357–370.
7 Shenoy, P. S. and Fatemi, A. Connecting rod optimiz-
ation for weight and cost reduction. SAE Technical
Paper 2005-01-0987, 2005.
8 Afzal, A. and Fatemi, A. A comparative study of fatigue
behaviour and life predictions of forged steel and PM
connecting rods. SAE Technical Paper 2004-01-1529,
2004.
9 Ferguson, C. R. Internal combustion engines, applied
thermo sciences, 1986 (John Wiley & Sons, Shrewsbury).
10 Sonsino, C. M. and Esper, F. J. Fatigue design for
PM components, 1994 (European Powder Metallurgy
Association (EPMA), New York).
11 Socie, D. F. and Marquis, G. B. Multiaxial fatigue, 2000
(Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA).
12 Stephens, R. I., Fatemi, A., Stephens, R. R., and
Fuchs, H. O. Metal fatigue in engineering, 2nd edition,
2000 (John Wiley & Sons, New York).
APPENDIX
Notation
Sf
completely reversed fatigue strength
Su
ultimate tensile strength
smx, smy
mean stress components
sqa
equivalent (von Mises) alternating
stress
sqm
equivalent mean stress
sx, sy
stress components
624
P S Shenoy and A Fatemi
Proc. IMechE Vol. 220 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
JMES105 # IMechE 2006
