ABSTRACT
The effect of the shape of the bowl on the combustion
process and emissions of a Natural Gas - Diesel dual fuel
engine is analyzed. The simulation of the dual fuel
combustion is performed with a modified version of the
KIVA3V code where diesel is treated as the main fuel and a
further reacting specie is introduced as methane (CH4). The
auto-ignition of the pilot is simulated with a modified version
of the Shell model and the first stage of the combustion,
related to the pilot burning process, is simulated with the
Characteristic 
Time 
Combustion 
model. 
When 
the
temperature of the mixture reaches a certain threshold, a
kernel of combustion is initialized. Until the kernel reaches a
nominal radius the combustion of CH4 is prevented. The
combustion of CH4 is simulated with a turbulent
characteristic time too. Numerical models were chosen as a
compromise between accuracy and computational time. The
model has been validated with comparison to experimental
data including in-cylinder pressure traces and tailpipe
emissions. The numerical analysis has been performed with
respect to a single cylinder diesel engine converted to dual
fuel combustion. The results of the investigation showed that
the conversion rate of CH4 can be increased by optimizing
the bowl profile.
INTRODUCTION
Gaseous fuels like natural gas have been extensively
investigated in literature [1, 2, 3, 4] as alternative to gasoline
and diesel. Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) has higher octane
number than gasoline, is more economical than traditional
fossil fuels due to its low production cost, and reduces air
pollution significantly [2]. Moreover, CNG contains neither
lead nor benzene and greenhouse gases emission from
combustion of CNG is about 25% lower than that of gasoline.
Another important advantage of CNG is the high stability
against knocking and the possibility to use higher
compression ratios than gasoline engines thus increasing
brake thermal efficiency and power [2]. On the other hand,
the higher compression ratio causes greater NOx [2].
Two different methods have been developed to convert a
direct injection diesel engine into a natural gas engine, CNG
dedicated and Dual Fuel. In the first case, ignition is
performed with the use of a spark plug like in a gasoline
engine while the dual-fuel mode uses compressed natural gas
(CNG) as the primary fuel and small quantities of diesel
pilot-fuel for ignition. Dual-fuel engines deriving from the
conversion of conventional diesel engines usually operate un-
throttled, with the load regulated by the admission of natural
gas in the intake manifold. This introduce a further challenge
in the numerical simulation of this systems i.e. the lean fuel
combustion mode. Dual fuel engines have lower emissions of
smoke and nitrogen oxides than conventional CI engines
while maintaining their high thermal efficiencies. However,
an increase of emissions of unburned hydrocarbons (HC) and
carbon monoxide (CO) is obtained due to poor ignitability of
the mixture [4].
In the conversion of a diesel engine to dual fuel, it is
important to keep the original components of the engine in
order to reduce the conversion costs. However, some
alterations have to be made to optimize the behavior of the
engine when CNG is used. Direct Injection diesel engines use
re-entrant bowl with a central protrusion in order to improve
the air-fuel mixing and accelerate the combustion process. Of
course, this kind of combustion chamber is not optimized for
dual fuel combustion. The aim of the present investigation is
to study the effect of the combustion chamber in the diesel-
Effect of the Shape of the Combustion Chamber
on Dual Fuel Combustion
2013-24-0115
Published
09/08/2013
Teresa Donateo, Luciano Strafella,  and  Domenico Laforgia
Universita del Salento
Copyright © 2013 SAE International
doi:10.4271/2013-24-0115
CNG conversion and optimizing its design with the help of a
computer aided procedure already applied to several diesel
engine configurations [5,6]. The procedure is based on the
coupling of a multi-objective genetic algorithm with a multi-
dimension simulation code able to accurately predict the
combustion process. The effectiveness of the procedure
results have been experimentally verified by building and
testing the optimized combustion chamber [5]. The key issue
is the validity of the simulation model used to simulate the
combustion process.
Dual fuel combustion is extremely complex because it
involves two fuels with different characteristics which are
simultaneously burned inside the cylinder. The heat release
rate of dual fuel combustion is the results [7, 8] of three
combustion stages: the combustion of the pilot injection of
diesel fuel, the combustion of the gaseous fuel that is in the
immediate vicinity of the ignition kernel and the pre-ignition
activity and subsequent turbulent flame propagation.
However, the relevance of the third stage depends on the
amount of natural gas. In the case of very lean mixtures, no
consistent flame propagation will take place from the ignition
centers and combustion is mainly influenced by the pilot
combustion. Only when the mixture becomes richer, a more
regular propagation of the flame can be obtained.
Detailed models of dual fuel combustion describe the
complex chemical mechanisms that govern the oxidation
process. The chemical kinetic schemes involve thousands of
elementary reaction steps that are believed to take place in
this kind of engines [10]. Since the rate coefficients are
determined on the basis of fundamental chemical processes,
there should be no need to adjust any of the rate coefficients
of the schemes. However, detailed chemical models may
need some calibration because the actual kinetic mechanisms
for each combustion process are unknown. Moreover, the
required computational time is still prohibitive in the case
under examination. In fact, the coupling of the CFD model
with the multi-objective genetic algorithm require hundreds
of runs to be performed with respect to different combustion
chamber profiles [5].
Reitz et al. [9, 11] developed a new combustion model for
dual fuel engine where flame propagation is simulated with
the level set method of Peters [12]. According to the analysis
of Reitz et al. [9, 11], ignition occurs in two different
positions, namely in the vicinity of the nozzle injector and in
the region of the combustion chamber where the spray
impacts on the cylinder walls. Then, combustion extends
through the remaining part of the chamber, but leaves
unburned a large proportion of mixture next to the wall of the
cylinder.
The engine models presented in this paper have been chosen
as a compromise between accuracy and computational load
so to allow the execution of the multi-objective optimization
in a reasonable time. The models have been validated through
comparison to experimental data on a reference engine. In the
present 
investigation, 
lean 
mixtures 
are 
considered
(0<ER<0.4) and dual fuel combustion is modeled with the
characteristic time combustion model for both diesel and
methane. The advanced models for ignition and spray already
implemented in the KivaCREA code have been used [13, 14,
15].
Experimental Tests
The engine considered in the present investigation (Table 1)
is a single cylinder optical engine under test at the
Department of Engineering for Innovation for the conversion
from direct injection diesel combustion to dual fuel mode.
A 
comprehensive 
experimental 
campaign 
with 
the
experimental layout of Figure 1 has been performed by
Carlucci et al. [16] to investigate the effect of the intake valve
configurations on the dual fuel combustion.
Although the engine is provided with two intake ducts (see
Figure 2), during the experiments only the swirl port was left
open. The experimental data presented here include both in-
cylinder pressure traces and emissions levels that have been
used for the validation of the proposed combustion model.
Table 1. Engine specification
Figure 1. Experimental setup
The gaseous fuel is introduced in the intake duct by means of
an injector. The Department of Engineering for Innovation
and in particular the Machinery Laboratory of University of
Salento is equipped with a mixing system for gaseous fuels
(Figure 3): this system allows to obtain a gaseous mixture of
five species (CO2, CO, H2, N2, CH4) with the opportunity to
decide their percentage; the pressure levels of the mixture so
obtained can vary in the range 1-10 bar abs, is sent in an
accumulation tank and from here to the ICE. In the present
investigation pure Methane was considered.
Figure 2. Intake manifold geometries and gaseous fuel
injection positions
Figure 3. Mixing system for gaseous fuels
The electronic control of the system has been realized
through FPGA managed by a LabView® Virtual Instrument.
This system generates the signal that controls the solenoid
valve by means of the acquisition of two signals from a
sensor mounted on the fly-wheel and the other on the pulley
fixed on the high pressure pump.In order to obtain a more
homogeneous gaseous air-fuel mixture the injector has been
positioned along the intake duct to a distance of about 40 cm
from the cylinder axis (see Figure 2).In order to ensure that
all the gaseous fuel enters the cylinder, gas injection has been
modified advancing the angle corresponding to the start of
injection while the angle corresponding to the end of the
injection has been keep constant and equal to 195 deg BTDC.
Specific tests were executed in order to validate the dual fuel
combustion model. In all the tests, the mass of diesel fuel was
kept constant to 5.0 mg by considering the same injection
pressure (500bar) and the same energizing time (300 ms).
The mass in the cylinder was also kept constant by setting the
same pressure at Top Dead Center for all the tests without
methane.
A first set of tests (Table 2 -Case 1) was performed by
changing the advance of the pilot and the engine speed with
and without methane. The second set (Table 3 - Case 2) was
obtained by changing only the mass of methane.
Table 2. Case 1
Table 3. Case 2
The procedure for the dual fuel tests consists of the following
steps:
• set the gas pressure;
• run the engine at the desired speed;
• inject the Diesel fuel with fixed values of qpilot, prail,
SOIpilot
• inject the gaseous fuel (as previously explained) until the
desired mass of methane is reached.
The parameters of interest were acquired, as cylinder pressure
and pollutant emission levels at the exhaust, by means of an
AVL AMA i60 emission analyzer.
Part-load condition and lean mixture have been considered.
These operating modes were chosen for the difficulty to
guarantee a satisfactory combustion process due to the low
amount of methane burnt in this condition. Further
investigation will take into account full load conditions where
the main challenge is to achieve the same torque curve as the
original diesel engine [17].
ENGINE MODELING
A complete fluid-dynamic analysis of the engine should
include the intake phase and the closed-valve portion of the
cycle. However, according to the simulation of the intake
process performed by the authors with the Fluent code, it is
possible to simplify the problem.
Open-valves Simulation
Figure 4 shows the distribution of methane (CH4) at 4°BTDC
obtained with the Fluent code run with initial conditions
found with the help of 1-D simulation code (AVL-Boost).
Note that, even if the charge is stratified at the intake, the
mixture is quite homogeneous at the end of the compression
stroke before the injection of the diesel fuel. This result
shows that the hypothesis of distribution uniformity of the
gaseous fuel during the whole compression stroke can be
accepted.
Figure 4. Molar fraction of CH4 at 4° BTDC calculated
with complete 3D simulation
Figure 5. Swirl profile calculated with complete 3D
simulation
The results of the 3D complete simulations also include the
swirl profile and the specification of the turbulent flow field
obtained with the original piston (Figure 5). The swirl profile
obtained with the Fluent simulation is represented by the
dotted line. Note that it is not axis-symmetrical as assumed in
the simulation of the closed-valve phase with the Kiva3v
code where the flow field is set at the Intake Valve Closing
with a parametric Bessel profile according to the value of a
parameter named “swipro” (considered equal to 3.13 in
Figure 5 as suggested in literature [18]). However, the
assumption of symmetry can be important to reduce the
computational time. Since diesel fuel is injected with a
central five-hole injector, the simulation of a sector of 72°
could be performed. To this, a modified profile (blue line) has
been considered for the simulations with Kiva3CREA. The
modified profile is still symmetrical but more similar to that
obtained by the complete simulation. In particular, it captures
the inversion of the flow rotation near to the cylinder walls.
Complete simulations with Fluent have been performed also
to assess the effect of changing the shape of the bowl on the
flow field generated during the intake phase [22]. To this, the
original bowl has been replaced with two arbitrary bowls
named “Bowl 1” and “Bowl 2”. The results of the simulation
are reported in Table 4. Note that the quantitative parameters
and the qualitative distribution of the length scale of
turbulence are only weakly affected by the shape of the
piston.
According to the results of this analysis, it is reasonable to
limit the simulation to the closed-valve portion of the engine
cycle if the goal is the optimization of the combustion process
by changing the bowl design. Of course, complete 3D
simulations would be very useful if the optimization would
include the design of the intake manifolds or the valve lift
profile.
Table 4. Effect of the bowl profile on the flow field at
Intake Valve Closing
Closed-valves Simulation
In the present work, a modified version of KIVA 3V code
developed at the CREA Research Center of University of
Salento is used for the close-valve portion of the engine
cycle. This version, named Kiva3CREA, was obtained by
eliminating the hypotheses of constant fuel density, the
constant spray angle and by using an improved version of the
Shell model [13,14] that was found to be able to predict the
ignition delay both for very early and very delayed injections
and large amount of EGR levels [13]. Some modifications
were required to simulate the dual fuel combustion with the
KivaCREA. Diesel was treated as the main fuel, thus the
spray models for injection, breakup, collisions and
evaporation were not modified. The second fuel, CH4, was
treated as a component of the air at the Intake Valve Closing
and its properties are calculated with the standard fuel
subroutine of Kiva3v.
Combustion and Emissions
The auto-ignition of the pilot is simulated with the modified
Shell mode and the first stage of the combustion, related to
the pilot burning process, is simulated with the Characteristic
Time Combustion model [14]. When the temperature of the
mixture reaches 1150K, a kernel of combustion is initialized.
Until the kernel reaches a nominal radius the combustion of
CH4 is prevented. The critical radius is calculated as [11]:
(1)
Where k is the turbulence kinetic energy and ε is its
dissipation rate. Once the kernel is formed, the CH4 in the
proximity of the kernel burns with a conversion rate
calculated according to a turbulent combustion time for
methane. CH4 only burn if the mixture temperature is higher
a threshold value Tth and the equivalence ratio is between the
lean and rich limits for methane. The model includes two
empirical parameters to match experimental data: the
threshold temperature Tth and the turbulent time constant
called C3.
(2)
A new species phi that does not participate in the combustion
was also introduced to implement the Level Set model and its
transport vectors were defined, but the simulations have
shown that the species phi does not propagate within the
chamber in correspondence of lean mixtures. Further
investigation are needed. As far as emissions are concerned,
the authors have not found in literature a model for dual fuel
CNG engines that is able to accurately predict the emissions
of CO and HC with acceptable computational times (e.g.
without using detailed kinetic schemes). On the other hand,
the main trends of NOx, and soot emissions can be captured
with the standard models used for diesel engines [19]. In
particular, NOx emissions can be predicted with the well
known Zeldovich Mechanism [19]. In the case of HC, the
emissions are evaluated numerically by considering the
amount of CH4 fuel unburned at the end of the simulation.
Thus, other causes of unburned hydrocarbons like the
lubricant and are not taken into account. For this reason, the
numerical value of unburned CH4 can be considered more as
a measure of the completeness of combustion than of the
actual HC emissions.
Validation of the Model
The validation was aimed at checking the capability of the
simulation code in predicting the effect of increasing the
mass of the methane and changing engine speed and pilot
advance. The parameters of the spray, ignition and
combustion models were set equal to the values of Table 5
and kept constant for all operating conditions. The code was
tested over the experimental tests of Case 1 and Case 2 where
the engine speed and the pilot advance are changed. The
experimental and numerical pressure traces are shown in
Figure 6 and Figure 9. The experimental in-cylinder pressure
traces are obtained by averaging 100 cycles for each case.
However, the cycle-to-cycle dispersion was found to be very
high in the tests with >15 mg of CH4.
Table 5. Tuning of the model
The ROHR plots represent the apparent net heat release, i.e.
the difference between the gross ROHR and the heat transfer
rate, calculated by the pressure p measured in the chamber
and the swept volume V [19] as:
(2)
where θ is the crank angle and γ is the ratio between constant
pressure and constant volume specific heat of the mixture.
The variation of γ with mixture composition [20] and the
contribution to net ROHR due to blow-by flows [21] are not
taken into account.
Case 1
The experimental and numerical pressure traces are shown in
Figure 6. The first row shows the tests with diesel fuel only
while the second row describes the results obtained by adding
15 mg of CH4 per cycle. Note that the numerical code
predicts very well the pressure traces in the case of diesel
only while underestimates the combustion rate and
overestimate the ignition delay in the case with CH4, thus
giving an higher peak of ROHR in the premixed-combustion
phase of diesel pilot. As far as emissions are concerned, the
main trend of NOx (Figure 7) and HC (Figure 8) are captured
by the model.
Figure 7. Emissions of NOx for case 1
Figure 8. Emissions of HC for case 1
Case 2
The second set of tests (Table 3) considers the variation of
mass per cycle of methane from 0 to 17.5mg while keeping
the same engine speed (1500rpm) and pilot advance (7.5
BTDC). The pressure and ROHR traces are reported in
Figure 9. In this case the peak of ROHR due to pilot
combustion in the experimental case is only slightly
influenced by the mass of CH4 while in the numerical case,
the peak increases from 0 mg to 15mg. Also, the predicted
heat release during the propagation phase of the flame
persists in the expansion strokes while experimentally the
propagation slows down faster. However, the emission trends
Figure 6. Traces of pressure and net ROHR for case 1 (
 exp. press. 
 num. press. 
 exp. ROHR 
 num. ROHR)
are reasonably captured both in the case of NOx (Figure 10)
and HC (Figure 11).
Figure 10. Emissions of NOx for case 2
Figure 11. Emissions of HC for case 2
Discussion of the Validation
The numerical code with the proposed models appears to
capture with accuracy compatible with the use of semi-
empirical models, the effect of changing the engine speed and
pilot advance quite well. Improvements have to be considered
to the modeling of the methane combustions, in particular to
the propagation of the flame. To this, the mapping of the
turbulent flow field predicted with Fluent into the KIVA3V
code will be considered.
The numerical values of emissions are quantitatively different
from experimental data but the trends are well captured both
Figure 9. Pressure and net ROHR traces for case 2 
 exp. ROHR 
 num. ROHR)
in case 1 (changing engine speed and pilot advance) and case
2 (changing mass of methane). All the test were performed
without changing any value of the tuning parameters of Table
5.
The computational time required on the Linux cluster used
for the validation (Beowulf system, master node Proliant
DL180 G6, dual processor Xeon, 14 nodes Proliant DL160
G6 dual processor Xeon) is about 11 minutes for each test.
As a result, the model can be considered suitable for the
combination with a multi-objective optimization of the bowl
profile over different operating conditions.
DESIGN PROCEDURE
In a direct injection diesel, the combustion chamber includes
the squish and the bowl regions shown in Figure 12. In order
to reduce the compression ratio when converting the baseline
engine from diesel to CNG combustion, it is possible to
increase the volume of either the squish or the bowl.
Figure 12. Nomenclature of the combustion chamber
and its corresponding computational grid
The effect on the combustion processes obtained in the two
cases can be quite different. For this reason, the proposed
conversion procedure takes into account three possibilities:
• Changing only the squish volume;
• Changing only the bowl volume;
• Changing both squish and bowl volumes.
Moreover, if an offset is present in the original piston
between the cylinder and the bowl axis (see Figure 13), the
new chamber could have:
• No offset;
• The same offset of the original piston;
• Another offset value.
A design procedure has been proposed in a previous
investigation for the conversion of a diesel engine to methane
combustion. The procedure [6] consists of 5 steps:
STEP 1.  definition of a database of combustion chambers
that can be obtained from the original piston (Manufacturable
Combustion Chambers MCCs);
STEP 2.  selection of the chambers that are able to resist to
the mechanical and thermal stresses expected in the CNG
combustion process (Feasible Manufacturable Combustion
Chambers FMCCs);
STEP 3.  selection of the initial and boundary conditions and
simulation of the combustion process with a multi-dimension
simulation code;
STEP 4.  analysis of the detonation behavior of the selected
chamber (if required);
STEP 5.  choice of the optimized combination of chamber
configuration and design parameters (Optimized, Feasible
and Manufacturable Combustion Chambers).
Steps 3 to 5 are performed in the framework of a multi-
objective genetic algorithm optimization process. More
details on the procedure and the design specification for
either CNG-dedicated or dual fuel engines can be found in [6]
Figure 13. Combustion chamber with offset
A computational mesh is automatically generated for each
combination of the parameters of Figure 14 is obtained with
the Meshmaker tool. The mesh is represented by a sector of
72° domain with an average resolution of 2 mm (since a five-
hole centrally located injector is used for diesel and the CH4
is assumed to be uniformly distributed in the combustion
chamber at the Intake Valve Closing).
The design method has been validated in a previous
application to direct injection diesel engine [5, 24]. A Pareto
optimal solution was selected after about 500 different
combustion chamber designs.
A piston with the selected bowl was built and tested at
operating conditions similar to those used in the optimization.
The experimental results showed that the optimized chamber
was effective in reducing soot and HC emissions and the
measured reduction of soot was higher than the calculated
one (up to 50% for one of the operating condition). As far as
NOx emissions are concerned, the experimental NOx-soot
trade-off with increasing EGR agreed with the result of the
optimization as shown in Figure 15 (see [24] for details).
Figure 14. Parametric profile of the bowl
Figure 15. Experimental validation of the optimization
process for a direct injection diesel engine (trade-off with
increasing EGR)
EFFECT OF BOWL PROFILE
In a previous investigation, the design procedure has been
applied over the same engine but with different operating
conditions and a previous version of the combustion model
[6]. Three different shapes of the bowl were identified and
compared. Their specifications are reported in Table 6.
Table 6. Geometrical features of the selected chambers
The geometrical specification refers to the parameterization
of the bowl profile shown in Figure 14 and based on five
geometrical features named Xe, Em, α, β ed r. All the
chambers have the same compression ratio (CR) and the
same squish height (SH); thus, the have the same bowl
volume. Details about the numerical procedure that define the
final shape of the bowl and a selection of combustion
chamber profiles generated for the reference engine can be
found in [6].The maximum diameter of the bowl (b) in Figure
14 is not used for defining the bowl profile being the resultant
of the choice of the bowl volume and the other parameters.
However, it is used in the feasibility analysis.
The chambers have been compared over the same operating
conditions used for the validation of the model (except those
without CH4). Figure 16 shows the results of the comparison
in the case with 7 mg of Methane, 1500 rpm and pilot
advance at 7.5 BTDC. Similar results were found in the other
cases at 1500 rpm but are not reported here. Note that all the
selected chambers guarantee an improvement of the
combustion efficiency and consequently a reduction of HC
emissions (see unburned CH4 at 50 ATDC) and a quite
complete elimination of soot emission. Unfortunately, the
emissions of NOx are quite higher than the baseline case. At
1500 rpm, Chamber A is best in terms of CH4 conversion
while chamber B and C guarantees the same levels of HC but
with different levels of NOx.
At 2000 rpm the behavior of the chambers is different.
Chamber A and B are worse than baseline with respect to HC
emissions (see unburned CH4 at 50 ATDC) while the best
results are obtained with chamber B. Once again the
emissions of NOx are worse than the baseline bowl for all the
selected configurations.
The goal of the investigation is to present the combustion
model and to check if the modification of the bowl profile
can have a significant role in the conversion of an engine
from diesel to methane. Thus, a detailed analysis of the
combustion processes in the three chambers is not presented.
However, the authors tried to separate the effect of the bowl
profile on the combustion process due to pilot from that of
methane. To this, the rate of heat release produced separately
by the two fuels has been reported in Figure 18. In the case
with early pilot (7.5°BTDC), low speed (1500 rpm) and very
lean mixture (ER=0.18), changing the chamber profile
determines an early combustion of the pilot but the peak of
ROHR from diesel is the same for all chambers and equal to
the baseline case (see the first row of Figure 18). The
combustion of CH4 starts early but the peak increases from
baseline to chamber A.
If the equivalent ratio of the mixture is increased (see second
row of Figure 18 with15 mg, 1500 rpm, 7.5 BTDC), the
chambers show the same behavior than in the previous case
as far as the ROHR due to methane combustion. The peak of
ROHR from diesel is not only anticipated but also the highest
for chamber A. Chamber B and C generated a similar
combustion of the pilot in this operating condition.
If the pilot is delayed (2.5 BTDC) with the same value of
methane mass (15 mg) and engine speed (1500 rpm), the
behavior of the chambers remains quite the same but chamber
C gives a higher peak of diesel ROHR than chamber B (third
row of Figure 18).
Finally, if the engine speed is increased (2000 rpm, 15 mg,
7.5BTDC), the combustion of CH4 is consistent with the
previous cases while the pilot ROHR obtained with each
chamber is significantly different than in the case at 1500
rpm.
This analysis shows that, as far as the methane combustion is
concerned, the optimization of the combustion chamber could
be performed with respect to a single operating condition.
On the contrary, the combustion of the pilot obtained with
each chambers is different when changing the operating
conditions of the engine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEASIBILITY AND COST ANALYSIS
A correlation has been proposed to estimate the maximum
temperature in the piston Tmax and the maximum stress σmax
as a function of the chamber geometrical features:
(3)
(4)
Figure 16. Comparison of the selected chambers (7 mg, 1500 rpm, 7.5 BTDC)
Figure 17. Comparison of the selected chambers (15 mg, 2000 rpm, 2.5 BTDC)
Figure 18. Effect of bowl profile on ROHR
Figure 19. Mechanical analysis of the bowls
Note that “b” is the results of an iterative procedure
implemented in Meshmaker [5] that changes its value until
the pre-fixed bowl volume is guaranteed with the values
chosen for the five parameters named Xe, Em, α, β ed r. Thus,
all the geometrical features of the bowl have an indirect effect
on the strength of the piston through the “b” parameter.
The values of the parameters K1, K2 and K3 have been
obtained as a results of the application of the numerical
procedure described in [23]. The empirical correlations have
been applied to chamber A, B and C in Figure 19. To
guarantee the mechanical resistance of the combustion
chamber, threshold values of 315°C for Tmax and 15 MPa and
σmax were considered. Note that chamber A and C satisfies
the limit of 315 °C for the maximum temperature but not the
threshold value for the pressure (15MPa). This means that the
choice of these chambers would require the design of a new
piston and a detailed analysis of the thermal and mechanical
stresses. On the contrary, the adoption of chamber B could be
done without much concern about the thermal stresses since
both Tmax and Pmax are below the threshold values. This
analysis was performed to stress the importance of taking into
account the mechanical resistance of the piston in the
optimization of the combustion bowl.
None of the combustion chambers found in the optimization
satisfied the manufacturability test, i.e. the possibility to
obtain the new chamber from the original piston as illustrated
in Figure 20 where the blue is the original profile of the
piston while the magenta dotted line represents the maximum
theoretical area that can be occupied by the bowl. The
automated procedure implemented in Matlab colors the
profile of the piston in green if it is all contained inside the
original piston. Points that are not compatible with the
original pistons are shown in red. Note that the profile of
Chamber C (also shown in Figure 20) is quite similar to the
original piston. A bowl with the main geometrical
specification of Chamber C but with a slightly higher volume
could be obtained by cutting the re-entrance of the original
piston (and modifying the shape of the central protrusion).
Figure 20. Profile of chamber C compared with the
original piston (blue line)
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
A combustion model for dual fuel engines have been
implemented in the Kiva3v code. The model is based on the
characteristic time combustion model but it also can take into
account the propagation of the flame with the level set
method. The propagation of the flame, however, was not
taken into account in the present investigation. Coupled with
improved models for ignition and spray modeling, the dual
fuel combustion model was found to reasonably capture the
combustion processes and the emissions trend of a diesel-
CH4 engine when changing pilot advance, engine speed and
methane equivalence ratio.
The model was used to analyze the effect of the bowl shape
on dual fuel combustion. Three shapes of the bowl (all with
the same volume) were compared with the original engine
piston (baseline). The bowls were able to significanlty reduce
the emissions of HC but with higher NOx emissions
compared with the baseline combustion chamber. A multi-
objective optimization will be performed as future
development to look for a bowl able to reduce HC emissions
without increasing NOx significantly. The bowls were also
analyzed from a mechanical and conversion cost point of
view.
The results of the analysis that the effect of bowl on CH4
combustion is not influenced by engine speed, pilot advance
and equivalence ratio but pilot combustion does. Therefore,
the multi-objective optimization will be performed with
respect to different engine speeds and diesel/methane energy
ratio. Finally, some of the bowl profile found with the method
will be built and test for a further validation of both the
combustion model and the optimization procedure.
REFERENCES
1.  Chandra R, Vijay V K, Subbarao P M V, Khura T K.,
“Performance evaluation of a constant speed IC engine on
CNG, methane enriched biogas and biogas”, Applied Energy;
88:3969-77, 2011.
2.  Von Mitzlaff K., Engines for biogas, Friedr. Vieweg &
Sohn Verlagsgesellschaft GmbH, 1988.
3.  Sen A K, Wang J, Huang Z., “Investigating the effect of
hydrogen addition on cyclic variability in a natural gas spark
ignition engine: Wavelet multiresolution analysis”, Applied
Energy; 88:4860-6, 2011.
4.  Namasivayam A M, Korakianitis T, Crookes R J, Bob-
Manuel K D H, Olsen J., “Biodiesel, emulsified biodiesel and
dimethyl ether as pilot fuels for natural gas fuelled engines”,
Applied Energy, 87: 769-78, 2010.
5.  Donateo T. Optimal Design of a Common Rail Diesel
Engine Piston, in Expensive Optimization Problems. In:
Tenne Y, Goh C-K, editors. Adaptation, Learning, and
Optimization. Springer Verlag; 2010, 2: p.513-41.
6.  Donateo T., Tornese F., Laforgia D, “Computer-aided
conversion of an engine from diesel to methane”, Applied
energy, in printing.
7.  Karim G A., “Combustion in gas fueled compression:
ignition engines of the dual fuel type”, Journal of
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 125:827-36, 2003.
8.  Karim, G., Liu, Z., and Jones, W., “Exhaust Emissions
from Dual Fuel Engines at Light Load,” SAE Technical
Paper 932822, 1993, doi:10.4271/932822.
9.  Singh, S., Kong, S., Reitz, R., Krishnan, S. et al.,
“Modeling and Experiments of Dual-Fuel Engine
Combustion and Emissions,” SAE Technical Paper
2004-01-0092, 2004, doi:10.4271/2004-01-0092.
10.  Cordiner, S., Rocco, V., Scarcelli, R., Gambino, M. et
al., “Experiments and Multi-Dimensional Simulation of Dual-
Fuel Diesel/Natural Gas Engines,” SAE Technical Paper
2007-24-0124, 2007, doi:10.4271/2007-24-0124.
11.  Tan Z, Reitz R D., “An ignition and combustion model
based on the level-set method for spark ignition engine
multidimensional modeling”, Combustion and Flame,
145:1-15, 2006.
12.  Peters N. “Turbulent Combustion”, Cambridge
University Press; 2000.
13.  de Risi, A., Zurlo, S., Donateo, T., and Laforgia, D., “3D
Simulations And Experimental Validation of High EGR -
PHCCI Combustion,” SAE Technical Paper 2007-24-0037,
2007, doi:10.4271/2007-24-0037.
14.  de Risi A, Donateo T, Laforgia D. “Theoretical
Investigation on Variable Density Sprays”, Atomization and
Sprays, 12:329-58, 2002.
15.  de Risi A, Donateo T, Laforgia D., “CFD Modeling of
pilot injection and EGR in DI diesel engines”, Proceedings of
the 2004 Fall Technical Conference of the ASME Internal
Combustion Engine Division, 251-63, 2004.
16.  Carlucci A P, Laforgia D, Saracino R, Toto G.,
“Combustion and emission control in diesel-methane dual
fuel engines: The effects of methane supply method
combined with variable in-cylinder charge bulk motion”,
Energy Conversion and Management 52:3004-17, 2011.
17.  Fu G, Zhao C, Liu B, Zhang F, Pang S, Li Y.
“Investigation on the combustion characteristics of a diesel
engine fueled with diesel-azides blends”, Applied Energy,
91:98-102, 2012.
18.  de Risi A, Donateo T, Laforgia D., “Theoretical
investigation on the influence of physical parameters on soot
and NOx engine emissions”, Proceedings of the 2001 Spring
Technical Conference of the ASME Internal Combustion
Engine Division; 29 April - 2 May 2001; 36: 53-64, 2001.
19.  Heywood J B., Internal Combustion Engine
Fundamentals, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1988.
20.  Wu H-W, Wu Z-Y,. Using Taguchi method on
combustion performance of a diesel engine with diesel/
biodiesel blend and port-inducting H2. Applied Energy
104:362, 2013;
21.  Mavropoulos G C., “Experimental study of the
interactions between long and short-term unsteady heat
transfer responses on the in-cylinder and exhaust manifold
diesel engine surfaces”, Applied Energy; 88: 867-81, 2011.
22.  Carrozza R, Donateo T, Laforgia D., “Effect of the
combustion chamber profile on the in-cylinder flow field in a
direction injection diesel engine”, Proceedings of 61°
Congresso Nazionale A.T.I., Perugia 12-15 September 2006.
23.  de Risi A, Donateo T, Nobile F, Vadacca G, Vedruccio
D. “Fluid Dynamics and Structural Behavior of Optimized
Combustion Chamber Profiles”, International Conference on
CAE and Computational Technologies for Industry, 16-17
October 2008, Mestre Italy, 2008.
24.  de Risi A, Donateo T, Laforgia D., “An Innovative
Methodology to Improve the Design and the Performance of
Direct Injection Diesel Engines”, International Journal of
Engine Research, 5:425-41, 2004.
DEFINITIONS/ABBREVIATIONS
ATDC - After Top Dead Center
BTDC - Before Top Dead Center
CI - Compression Ignition
CFD - Computational Fluid Dynamics
CNG - Compressed Natural Gas
CR - Compression ratio
ER - Equivalence Ratio
IVC - Intake Valve Closing
ROHR - Rate of Heat Release
The Engineering Meetings Board has approved this paper for publication. It has
successfully completed SAE's peer review process under the supervision of the session
organizer. This process requires a minimum of three (3) reviews by industry experts.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of SAE.
ISSN 0148-7191
Positions and opinions advanced in this paper are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of SAE. The author is solely responsible for the content of the paper.
SAE Customer Service:
Tel: 877-606-7323 (inside USA and Canada)
Tel: 724-776-4970 (outside USA)
Fax: 724-776-0790
Email: CustomerService@sae.org
SAE Web Address: http://www.sae.org
Printed in USA
