ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
173 
 
Failure Analysis of Internal Combustion Engine 
Valves: A Review 
 
Naresh Kr. Raghuwanshi1, Ajay Pandey2, R. K. Mandloi3 
Department of Applied Mechanics, M.A.N.I.T., Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India1 
Department of Applied Mechanics, M.A.N.I.T., Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India2 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, M.A.N.I.T., Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India3 
 
Abstract: Intake and exhaust valves are very important engine components that are used to control the flow and exchange of 
gases in internal combustion engines. They are used to seal the working space inside the cylinder against the manifolds; and are 
opened and closed by means of what is known as the valve train mechanism. Such valves are loaded by spring forces and 
subjected to thermal loading due to high temperature and pressure inside the cylinder. The present study focuses on different 
failure modes of internal combustion engine valves, failures due to fatigue at high temperature, high temperature effects on 
mechanical properties of materials, like hardness and yield strength; wear failure which is due to impact loading, and wear rate 
that depends on load and time. For the study of fatigue life, a combined S-N (max. stress v/s number of cycles) curve is prepared. 
Such a curve helps in comparing the fatigue failure for different materials at different high temperatures and may also assist the 
researchers in developing the valve materials with a prolonged life.   
 
Keywords: Failure, Internal Combustion Engine Valves, High Temperature, Fatigue, Wear. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
Internal combustion engine valves are precision engine components. They open and close as and when needed. The fresh charge 
(air - fuel mixture in Spark Ignition Engines and air alone in Compression Ignition Engines) is induced through inlet valves and 
the products of combustion get discharged to atmosphere through exhaust valves.  They are also used to seal the working space 
inside the cylinder against the manifolds [1]. 
 
There are different types of valves used by the manufactures; some common types of valves being poppet valves, slide valves, 
rotary valves and sleeve valve. The basic nomenclature used for valves is as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Fig. 1 The basic nomenclature of engine valve. 
Source: H.J.C. Voorwalda et al. (2011) [2] 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
174 
 
 
 
Any type of valve failure affects the engine performance thus making it mandatory to give due importance to failure analysis of 
internal combustion engine valves. Possible modes of valves failure are wear failure, valve face recession,  fatigue failure, 
thermal fatigue, erosion / corrosion of valves, overheating of valves, carbon deposits on valves etc. 
 
Available research literature about valve failures indicates that valve design is a complicated task because the valve is subjected 
to various loads at any point of time, such as reverse loading at a high temperature, stress concentration at the keeper groove area 
and under carbon deposits at exhaust valves. The valves generally fail by fatigue [1], [2].  
 
A closed valve is loaded by spring force and pressure inside the cylinder, which varies periodically during engine operation and 
reaches a peak value of the order of 15 MPa. Such high pressures inside the cylinder cause bending of the valve cone, which 
results in a sliding motion and improper contact between valve face and seat insert thus eventually leading to wear failure. The 
Otto and Diesel engines operate at temperatures of 550ºC inside the intake valve; the corresponding values inside the exhaust 
valve being 700°C and 800°C, respectively. The exhaust valve temperature can shoot up to 900°C. Since the exhaust valves 
operate at high temperatures, they are exposed to thermal load and chemical corrosion. The intake valves, which are not 
subjected to such extreme thermal loading, are cooled by incoming gases, thermal transmission at the seat, and by other means 
[1], [2], [3].  
 
Valves are subjected to cyclic loading due to valve train dynamics. The stem of the valve is under axial repeated loading, it can 
fail by axial Fatigue. The keeper groove area is subjected to tensile stresses and becomes a critical section due to geometric stress 
concentrations. In this paper all possible failures of valves are considered and discussed [2].            
 
II. METHODOLOGY 
 
There are Different methodologies used by researchers to obtain a good design and economic performance of the valves by 
considering different valves failure criteria. Different types of failure and their causes are discussed in the following articles. 
A. Failure due to fatigue 
 
The word fatigue is derived from the Latin fatigare which means “to tire”. In engineering terminology fatigue is a progressive 
structural damage of materials under cyclic loads. Important categories of fatigue include: Mechanical fatigue due to fluctuating 
stresses Creep fatigue due to cyclic loads at high temperatures; Thermal fatigue due to cyclic changes in material’s temperature; 
Thermo-mechanical fatigue due to a combination of mechanical and thermal fatigue; corrosion fatigue due to cyclic loads 
applied on corroded materials, Fretting fatigue due to cyclic stresses together with the oscillation motion and frictional sliding 
between surfaces, etc.. Fatigue failure occurs at stresses that are well below the yield point of the material [3].  
 
I.C. Engine valves are subjected to repeated cyclic loading due to valve train dynamics. Repeated loading results in materials 
failing well below the yield strength.  When the material is subjected to fatigue, one or more tiny cracks usually start developing 
in the material, and these grow until complete failure occurs. 
 
There are different types of fatigue mechanisms: thermal fatigue, high-cycle fatigue, low-cycle fatigue, surface fatigue, bending 
fatigue, corrosion fatigue, torsional fatigue, and fretting fatigue. In valves, some of the more common failures are due to thermal 
fatigue, corrosion fatigue, and low and high-cycle fatigue.  
 
When it comes to fatigue, the S–N curves are often used to represent fatigue behavior. Because fatigue testing is time and energy 
consuming, predictive methods are often used [4], [5], [6]. 
 
In many industries, the number of stress cycles for lifetime services are above 107 cycles, The fatigue fracture is basically 
observed under low cycle fatigue, normally less than 105 cycles. The fatigue life varies usually from 105 cycles to 107 cycles [6].  
 
Researchers have come up with a number of results for fatigue testing, one of them being discussed in this paper for material 
X45CrSi93 stainless steel for engine valves. The X45CrSi93 stainless steel is prepared from hot rolled bars that are machined, 
quenched and tempered. After heat treatment the materials are divided into two groups - nitride and chrome plated. These two 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
175 
 
groups are compared with the material without surface treatment. By comparison it is found that the fatigue limit is directly 
proportional to the mechanical strength. The hardness profile analysis of nitride material is prepared so as to determine the actual 
nitrogen diffusion depth. To start with, the hardness value is high but becomes constant as one goes deeper. Fig.2 shows the 
nitride layer hardness profile. Fig.3 S-N depicts axial fatigue curves for X45CrSi93 stainless steel [2]. These curves (fig.2 & 3) 
show that the fatigue limit is well below the yield limit of the material. 
 
 
Fig. 2 Hardness profile of the nitrided layer 
Source: H.J.C. Voolwalda et al. (2011)[2] 
 
 
 
Fig.3 Axial fatigue curve for nitrided X45CrSi93 Steel 
 
 
 
The fatigue cracks are found in the nitride layer stainless steel in fig.4. At the diffusion layer the fracture propagation starts and 
leads up to the final rupture [2]. The different fracture propagation between the regions with higher and lower nitrogen contents 
are shown in fig.4. 
 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
176 
 
 
Fig. 4  Start of fatigue crack propagation 
Source: H.J.C. Voolwalda et al. (2011)[2] 
 
B.  Failures due to high temperature 
 
 Exhaust valves operate at very high temperatures and subjected to cyclic loading, The failure of the conical surface of valve is 
mainly caused by the elastic and plastic deformation, and fatigue. Exhaust valve stem generally fail by overheating because the 
temperature of the exhaust valve is about 720 ºC. The fracture surface of the valve stem is covered with a black oxide scale 
formation; fracture surface in the fatigue area is smooth and is covered with thick oxide or deposits that cannot be removed 
satisfactory. In the middle portion of the stem a longitudinal fretting damage is occurred. Some small cracks are initiated and 
propagated across the section. With high loading, multiple cracks are initiated if the valves are subjected to high temperatures 
and, under such operating conditions, it would be logical to expect that failure would occur within a few million cycles. A 
fractured valve stem is shown in fig.5 (a) & (b) [7].  
 
The significant hardness is loused and the surface oxidation and fretting/galling on the valve stem occur due to overheating. The 
fatigue properties of the alloy suffer due to high temperature. This is the cause of multiple fatigue crack initiation. The failed 
exhaust valves are shown in Fig. 6, valve no. 4 is a new exhaust valve that is compared with the failed valve No. 1, No. 2 and No. 
3. The failure had taken place at the plates of the exhaust valves as seen in fig.6 [8].  
 
 
(a) 
 
 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
177 
 
 
(b) 
Fig. 5 (a) The failed exhaust valve stem & (b) Edge of the fracture surface of valve stem . 
Source: Oh Geon Kwon and  Moon Silk Han(2004) [7] 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Photograph of failed exhaust valves 
Source: Z.W. Yu and X.L. Xu (2006) [8] 
 
 
 
In Valve No. 1 and No. 2, the cracks initiated from the tapered plane of the plate and propagated toward the bottom plane along a 
45º direction to the bottom plane. In case of Valve No. 3, serious loss occurred at one side of the plate (fig.7). There are two main 
radial splits in the plate, having both edges burnt. There are some small circumferential cracks on the tapered plane of both sides 
of the splits. It was found that a lot of carbon deposition appears on the plate surface [8]. 
 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
178 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Fractured plate of Valve No. 3 
Source: Z.W. Yu and X.L. Xu (2006) [8] 
 
C. Failure of valve due to erosion-corrosion  
 
As discussed above, the exhaust valves operate at high temperature. The resulting scale formation on the valves corrodes the 
surface of valve due to exhaust flue gases. Structural metals have always had surface material removed in service as the result of 
erosion by small, solid, impacting particles. In most elevated - temperature erosion environments, the eroding surface is 
undergoing corrosion as well as erosion. In one test series, a nickel oxide scale was formed up to 100 μm thick at 1000ºC on 
commercially pure nickel [9]. 
           
 The erosion-corrosion of exhaust valves (valve guttering) is an important cause of failure of internal combustion engines valves.  
Valve guttering generally occurs due to exhaust gas flowing across the valve face surface, resulting in the formation of a radial 
channel or gutter. Typical causes of leakage include valve distortion, face peening and degradation of face deposits. The 
accumulation of combustion - derived deposits on valve surfaces interferes with proper seating of the valve and promotes leakage. 
In studies of the effects of burning heavy fuels on the degradation of diesel exhaust valve seats, the role of “scales” deposited on 
seating surfaces are reduced the heat flow through the contact. Lubricants containing high sulfated ash levels (over 1.0 weight %) 
have been identified as potential contributors to heavy deposit formation and valve guttering in these engines [10]. 
 
D. Failure of valve due to wear 
Wear Failure occurs generally at the seating face of valves and stem at which portion that slide on valve stem guide. Wear mainly 
occurs due to two major factors, he first one is the impact force between seating face of valve and seat insert, whereas the second 
one is due to sliding of the valve on the seat insert during the action of combustion pressure. The rubbing action and impacting 
action wear out the valve face. Typical mechanisms of wear include adhesive, abrasive, fretting, erosion, cavitation, and contact 
rolling fatigue.  
 
The gas engine valves are more wear - prone. Fig.8. shows the relationship between wear mass loss and time. It is seen that at 1.0 
KN loading wear mass loss larger than at 0.7 KN loading [5], [11], [12].  
 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
179 
 
 
Fig. 8 Relationship between wear mass loss and time. 
 
Wear is divided into three stages: running - in wear stage, stable wear stage, and sharp wear stage. In running - in wear stage, the 
temperature is high. Under the action of high impact varying load, the strength and hardness of surface material of gas - valve is 
decreased because of high temperature, the plastic deformation initiates so the seat face of valves are worn out and the wear mass 
loss sharply speed - up with the passage of time. With the increment of expulsion quantity, surface roughness drops and practical 
contact area of gas - valve increases. Rmax data shows the wear at seat face of valve which is the difference between maximum 
and minimum values of measurement length. A bar graph shows the Rmax v/s number of cycles in fig.9. From the graph it is clear 
that more wear occurs with increasing number of cycles [11], [13]. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Average R max at 10 Hz For seat face of Valve 
 
III. ANALYSIS  
From the above study, it is found that the predominant cause of failure of valves of internal combustion engine is fatigue. The 
valves are subjected to high temperature, cyclic loading, impact loading, erosion-corrosion and high pressure inside the cylinder, 
thus making it critically important to know about fatigue under these conditions. Researchers have been seeking to know the 
fatigue failure mechanism, because the fatigue failure under actual loading conditions is different from simple mechanical fatigue 
failure. In fatigue failure the material fails well - below the yield strength of that material. In this study a combined S-N (max. 
stress V/s number of cycles to failure) curve is prepared for different materials. 
 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
180 
 
 
 
 
         
                                               
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                
 
                                                   900 
 
                                          800 
 
                                          700 
 
                                          600 
 
                                          500 
 
                                          400 
 
                                          300 
 
                                          200 
     
                                          100 
                                                        
                                                    103           104         105       106      107       108     109 
                                                                             
 
 
 
Fig. 10  S-N curve for different materials engine valve at high temperature. 
 
 
Fig.10. shows the S-N curves for different materials, nitride layer on X45CrSi93 stainless steel fail at 900 MPa max. stress after 
104 cycles and at 600 MPa stress after 106 cycles. Similarly, other materials like austenitic steel at 700°C fail at 380 MPa stress 
after 103 cycles and at 300 MPa stress after 109 cycles. The curve is very flat which indicates that the it can be used only at high 
cycle applications. 
 
Internal combustion engine valves are generally designed up to 106 stress cycles to prevent the failure of valves but at present 
there are different materials available which do not fail even after 107 or 108 cycles. At high temperature, the fatigue strength 
decreases considerably but the ceramic materials have a good fatigue strength even at high temperatures and can operate without 
failure up to 109  cycles but it can be used only for high cycle applications. Nickel - base alloys have low fatigue strength but can 
operate at very high temperature of about 1027°C.     
IV. CONCLUSION 
From the above study of I.C. Engine valve failures, it is quite evident that a common cause of valve fracture is fatigue. Valves 
fail due to cyclic loading at high temperatures. High temperature is also responsible for decrease in hardness and yield strength of 
valve material, and also causes corrosion of exhaust valves. The surface oxidation and fretting / galling on the valve stem occur 
due to overheating and fatigue strength is decreased due to overheating. The impact loading of the valve face on the valve seat 
results in removal of material from that portion, which is known as valve recession. Wear failure occurs generally at the seat face 
of valve and at the stem due to sliding inside the stem guide. The wear rate increases with increase the number of cycles.  Failure 
due to erosion-corrosion of exhaust valves is also a recognized failure mode in internal combustion engine valves.  
 
 Max. stress  (MPa) 
22CrMoV121 
steel at 400°C 
Nickel-base alloy at 
1027°C 
Si3N4 
ceramic 
at1000⁰ C 
Austenitic steel 
at 700°C 
17-4PH 
Martensitic 
stainless 
steel 
Nitride layer on 
X45CrSi93 
stainless steel        
Number of cycles to failure 
ISSN: 2319 – 8753 
 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 
Vol. 1, Issue 2, December 2012 
 
    Copyright to IJIRSET 
 
                www.ijirset.com 
 
181 
 
Fatigue failure is the main cause of valve failure. The fatigue strength is significantly decreased with increase of temperature. 
The combined S-N curve shown in Fig.10 is useful for comparing fatigue failure of the material, corresponding stresses cycles; 
and for developing a high fatigue strength material even at high temperature. The current focus is on light weight engine valves 
made up of ceramic materials which can operate without failure at high temperatures and can sustain stress cycles up to 109. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to acknowledge the support rendered by Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology in preparation of this 
manuscript.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
 [1]    M. I. Karamangil A. Avci and H. Bilal , Investigation of the effect of different carbon film thickness on the exhaust valve. Heat Mass Transfer 44 (2008) 
          587–598  
 [2]   H. J. C. Voorwalda, R. C. Coisse, and M. O. H.Cioffi. Fatigue Strength of X45CrSi93 stainless steel applied as internal combustion engine valves. Procedia  
          Engineering 10 (2011)   1256–1261. 
 [3]    V.Kazymyrovych, Very high cycle fatigue of engineering materials. Karlstad University Studies 2009:22. ISSN 1403-8099,  ISBN 978-91-7063-246-4 
 [4]    Dowling, Norman E.: Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Engineering Methods for Deformation, Fracture and Fatigue. Prentice- Hall. 
 [5]    D. J. Benac and R. A. Page, Integrating Design, Maintenance, and Failure Analysis to Increase Structural Valve Integrity. ASM International 3 (2001) 31- 
          43  
 [6]    Y.B. Liu, Y.D. Li, S.X. Li, Z.G. Yang,S.M. Chen, W.J. Hui, and Y.Q. Weng  , Prediction of the S–N curves of high-strength steels in the very high cycle 
          fatigue regim. International Journal of Fatigue 32 (2010) 1351–1357 
 [7]    Oh Geon Kwon and Moon Sik Han, Failure analysis of the exhaust valve stem from a Waukesha P9390 GSI gas engine.  Engineering Failure Analysis 11 
          (2004) 439-447   
 [8]    Z.W. Yu and  X.L. Xu, Failure analysis and metallurgical investigation of diesel engine exhaust valves. Engineering Failure  Analysis 13 (2006) 673–682  
 [9]    Alan V. Levy, Solid particle erosion and erosion-corrosion of materials. copyright1995 by ASM International 
 [10]   C.G. Scott, A.T. Riga and H. Hong. The erosion-corrosion of nickel-base diesel engine exhaust valves.  Wear 181-183 (1995) 485-494.  
 [11]   ZHAO Yun-cai and YAN Hang-zhi, Experimental study on wear failure course of gas-valve/valve-seat in engine. J. Cent. South University.  Technology  
           12  (2005) 243-246. 
 [12]   P. Forsberg, P. Hollman, and S. Jacobson, Wear mechanism study of exhaust valve system in modern heavy duty combustion engines. Wear 271 (2011)  
           2477– 2484   
 [13]   Keyoung Jin Chun, Jae Hak Kim, and Jae Soo Hong, A study of exhaust valve and seat insert wear depending on cycle  numbers. Wear 263 (2007) 1147– 
           1157  
Biography 
 
Name: Naresh Kr. Raghuwanshi 
Affiliation: P. G. Student at Department of Applied Mechanics, MANIT, Bhopal - 462043 
Specialization / Interest Area: Stress & Vibration Analysis, Automobile Engineering 
E-mail Address: naresh_raghuwanshi@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name: Prof. Ajay Pandey 
Affiliation: Department of Applied Mechanics, MANIT, Bhopal - 462043 
Specialization / Interest Area: Reliability Engineering, Industrial Design & Automobile Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name: Dr. R. K. Mandloi 
Affiliation: Department of Mechanical Engineering, MANIT, Bhopal – 462043 
Specialization / Interest Area: Automobile Engineering  
 
 
 
