136
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI)
GEOMETRIC OPTIMIZATION OF CRANK SHAFT FOR 
OPTIMUM DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT OF LIFE 
Kamugari Naveen Goud1, Baby Theresa Gudavalli2, Godi Subba Rao3,
1 Research Scholar, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hyderabad Institute of Technology and Management, Hyderabad, India
2 Assistant Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hyderabad Institute of Technology and Management, Hyderabad, India
3 Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hyderabad Institute of Technology and Management, Hyderabad, India
*Corresponding Author: 
Kamugari Naveen Goud, 
Research Scholar, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
HyderabadInstituteOfTechnology 
And Management,Hyderabad,India
Published: July 04, 2015
Review Type: peer reviewed
Volume: II, Issue : IV
Citation: Kamugari Naveen Goud, Research Scholar 
(2015) GEOMETRIC OPTIMIZATION OF CRANK SHAFT 
FOR OPTIMUM DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT OF LIFE 
INTRODUCTION
The crankshaft, sometimes casually abbreviated to crank, 
is the part of an engine which translates reciprocating 
linear piston motion into rotation. To convert the recip-
rocating motion into rotation, the crankshaft has "crank 
throws" or "crankpins", additional bearing surfaces whose 
axis is offset from that of the crank, to which the "big 
ends" of the connecting rods from each cylinder attach.
Design
Components of a typical, four stroke cycle, DOHC pis-
ton engine. (E) Exhaust camshaft, (I) Intake camshaft, (S) 
Spark plug, (V) Valves, (P) Piston, (R) Connecting rod, (C) 
Crankshaft, (W) Water jacket for coolant flow.
Stress on crankshafts
The shaft is subjected to various forces but generally 
needs to be analysed in two positions. Firstly, failure may 
occur at the position of maximum bending; this may be 
at the centre of the crank or at either end. In such a con-
dition the failure is due to bending and the pressure in 
the cylinder is maximal. Second, the crank may fail due 
to twisting, so the conrod needs to be checked for shear 
at the position of maximal twisting. The pressure at this 
position is the maximal pressure, but only a fraction of 
maximal pressure. 
A crankshaft contains two or more centrally-located co-
axial cylindrical ("main") journals and one or more offset 
cylindrical crankpin ("rod") journals. The two-plane V8 
crankshaft pictured in Figure 1 has five main journals 
and four rod journals, each spaced 90° from its neigbors.
Abstract
Crankshaft is a component in an engine which converts the reciprocating motion of the piston to the rotary motion. De-
sign of a crankshaft of Honda engine, it is assembled by the connecting rod and piston components in Pro engineering. 
The designed model of engine crankshaft is analyzed in pro engineering by using its mechanism. Piston generates the 
forces due to the combustion. These forces acting on the piston are analyzed by using their mechanisms with respect 
to crank angle.
The aim of the project is to generate efficient model within low weight and good structural ability for the improvement 
of life.
Initially da ta collection and literature survey will be done to understand methodology and selection of material.
3D model will be prepared according to the dimensions’ obtained from theoretical calculations.
Analysis will be done to validate structural and thermal behavior; design modifications will be according to the obtained 
results to improve the structural stability, material will be removed at stress non effecting areas to reduce the weight.
Analysis will be done to compare modified with existing model, conclusion will be made after comparing results
1401-1402
137
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
The crankshaft main journals rotate in a set of supporting 
bearings ("main bearings"), causing the offset rod journals 
to rotate in a circular path around the main journal cent-
ers, the diameter of which is twice the offset of the rod 
journals. The diameter of that path is the engine "stroke": 
the distance the piston moves up and down in its cylin-
der. The big ends of the connecting rods ("conrods") con-
tain bearings ("rod bearings") which ride on the offset rod 
journals.
FORCES IMPOSED ON A CRANKSHAFT
The obvious source of forces applied to a crankshaft is the 
product of combustion chamber pressure acting on the 
top of the piston. High-performance, normally-aspirated 
Spark-ignition (SI) engines can have combustion pres-
sures in the 100-bar neighborhood (1450 psi), while con-
temporary high-performance Compression-Ignition (CI) 
engines can see combustion pressures in excess of 200 
bar (2900 psi). A pressure of 100 bar acting on a 4.00 inch 
diameter piston wil produce a force of 18,221 pounds. A 
pressure of 200 bar acting on a 4.00 inch diameter piston 
produces a force of 36,442 pounds. That level of force ex-
erted onto a crankshaft rod journal produces substantial 
bending and torsional moments and the resulting tensile, 
compressive and shear stresses.
CRANKSHAFT MANUFACTURING PROCESSES
Many high performance crankshafts are formed by the 
forging process, in which a billet of suitable size is heated 
to the appropriate forging temperature, typically in the 
range of 1950 - 2250°F, and then successively pounded 
or pressed into the desired shape by squeezing the billet 
between pairs of dies under very high pressure. These die 
sets have the concave negative form of the desired exter-
nal shape. Complex shapes and / or extreme deforma-
tions often require more than one set of dies to accom-
plish the shaping.
Originally, two-plane V8 cranks were forged in a single 
plane, then the number two and four main journals were 
reheated and twisted 90° to move crankpins number two 
and three into a perpendicular plane. Later developments 
in forging technology allowed the forging of a 2-plane 
"non-twist" crank directly 
INTRODUCTION TO PRO/ENGINEER
Pro/ENGINEER is the industry’s standard 3D mechanical 
design suit. It is the world’s leading CAD/CAM /CAE soft-
ware, gives a broad range of integrated solutions to cover 
all aspects of product design and manufacturing. Much 
of its success can be attributed to its technology which 
spurs its customer’s to more quickly and consistently in-
novate a new robust, parametric, feature based model, 
because the Pro/E technology is unmatched in this field, 
in all processes, in all countries, in all kind of companies 
along the supply chains. Pro/Engineer is also the perfect 
solution for the manufacturing enterprise, with associa-
tive applications, robust responsiveness and web connec-
tivity that make it the ideal flexible engineering solution 
to accelerate innovations. Pro/Engineer provides easy to 
use solution tailored to the needs of small, medium sized 
enterprises as well as large industrial corporations in all 
industries, consumer goods, fabrications and assembly, 
electrical and electronics goods, automotive, aerospace 
etc.
DESIGN OF MULTI CYLINDER ENGINE CRANK SHAFT 
(DIESEL ENGINE)
Number of cylinders=4
Bore diameter (D) = 85 mm
 Stroke length (l)    = 96mm
Maximum combustion pressure=2.5 N/mm2
We know that force on the piston i,e: gas load 
In order to find the thrust in connecting rod we should 
find out angle of inclination of connecting rod with line 
of stroke
Assume that the distance (b) between the bearings 1 and 
2 is equal to twice the piston diameter (D). 
 b = 2D = 2 × 85 =170mm 
Due to this piston gas load (FP) acting horizontally, there 
will be two horizontal reactions H1and H2 at bearings 1 
and 2 respectively, such that  
 b1 = b2= 85mm
Assume that the length of the main bearings to be equal, 
i.e.,
 c1 = c2 = c / 2. 
We know that due to the weight of the flywheel acting 
downwards, there will be two vertical reactions V2 and V3 
at Bearings 2 and 3 respectively, such that
138
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
MODEL OF CRANK SHAFT
                
                     The above image shows sketcher
                    The above image shows crank web
             The above image shows crank shaft final model
STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT EX-
ISTING MODEL
MATERIAL: CARBON STEEL
                    The above image shows imported model
                    The above image shows meshed model
                       The above image shows load applied
139
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
                 The above image shows total deformation
                            The above image shows stress
                           The above image shows strain
MODEL ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT EXISTING 
MODEL
THERMAL ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT EXIST-
ING MODEL
                        The above image shows temperature
                     The above image shows total heat flux
140
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
                      The above image shows thermal error
FATIGUE ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT EXISTING 
MODEL
                                 The above image shows life
                   The above image shows safety factor
STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT MOD-
IFIED MODEL
MATERIAL: CARBON STEEL
              The above image shows imported model
                The above image shows total deformation
                       The above image shows stress
141
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
MODEL ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT MODIFIED 
MODEL
            The above image shows total deformation mode 1
THERMAL ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT MODI-
FIED MODEL
                        The above image shows temperature
                    The above image shows total heat flux
RESULTS AND GRAPHS
STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS GRAPHS
               The above image shows displacement graph
                      The above image shows stress graph
THERMAL ANALYSIS
                  The above image shows thermal error
FATIGUE ANALYSIS
                 The above image shows Safety factor
142
International Journal of Research and Innovation (IJRI) 
STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
Existing model
Modified model
carbon steel
nickel 
chromium 
molybdenum 
steel
carbon steel
nickel chromium 
molybdenum 
steel
Total defor-
mation
0.00094443
0.0009807
0.00080902
0.0007657
Stress
3.2358
3.3025
2.5753
2.6323
Strain
1.253e-5
1.6546e-5
1.2112e-5
1.3193e-5
THERMAL  ANALYSIS
Existing model
Modified model
carbon steel
nickel 
chromium 
molybdenum 
steel
carbon steel
nickel chromium 
molybdenum 
steel
Temperature
150
150
150
150
Total heat 
flux
2.3442
0.87371
2.5669
1.0331
Thermal error
5.3054e5
1.0861e5
8.766e5
1.942e5
FATIGUE ANALYSIS
Existing model
Modified model
carbon steel
nickel 
chromium 
molybdenum 
steel
carbon steel
nickel chromium 
molybdenum 
steel
LIFE
3.65e9
3.65e9
3.65e9
3.65e9
Damage
0.27397
0.27397
0.27397
0.27397
Safety factor
3.3357
3.2683
4.1911
4.1005
Biaxiality 
indication
0.99899
0.99889
0.9993
0.99819
Alternating 
stress
32.358
33.025
25.753
26.323
CONCLUSION
This project works deals with “GEOMETRIC OPTIMIZA-
TION OF CRANK SHAFT FOR OPTIMUM DESIGN AND 
IMPROVEMENT OF LIFE”
Initially literature survey and data collection was done to 
understand methodology.
Crank shaft parameters are calculated using empirical 
formals for 6 cylinder engine.
3d model is prepared according to the obtained valve from 
calculation,
Static, fatigue and dynamic analysis is done on crank-
shaft using low carbon steel. Same as been done using 
steel nickel chromium molybdenum steel material and to 
find out the failure locations and to evaluate results.
Geometric modifications are done on crank shaft model to 
reduce stress concentration by implementing stress reliv-
ing holes on web.
As per the Static, fatigue and dynamic analysis results, 
existing model is up to the mark only. Implementation of 
nickel chromium molybdenum steel material will increase 
life by 2%, while Appling stress reliving holes, life will be 
increased by 17.8%. Also material is removed from the 
crank web. So better to use modified model with nickel 
chromium molybdenum steel material.
This project concludes that modified model with nickel 
chromium molybdenum steel material increases the life 
and also weight will be reduced up to 15% which interns 
increases the mechanical efficiency
REFERENCES
1.	 Dynamic Stress Analysis of a Multi cylinder Two-
stage Compressor Crankshaft
2.	 DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF CRANKSHAFT FOR SIN-
GLE CYLINDER 4-STROKE DEISEL ENGINE
3.	 Crankshaft Design and Optimization- A Review
4.	 Theoretical and Experimental Analysis of Torsional 
and Bending Effect on Four Cylinders Engine Crank-
shafts by Using Finite Element Approach
5.	 Fatigue Strength and Residual Stress Analysis of 
Deep Rolled Crankshafts
6.	  Finite Element Analysis of 4-Cylinder Diesel Crank-
shaft
7.	 Crankshaft Strength Analysis Using Finite Element 
Method
8.	 Concept and manufacture of a crankshaft production 
tool
9.	 Crankshaft, Flexible tool, Finite element method, Ex-
perimentation.
10.	Elastic Multi Body Simulation of a Multi-Cylinder En-
gine
author
Kamugari –Naveen Goud
Research Scholar, 
Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Hyderabadinstitute of Technology and Management,
Hyderabad,India
Baby Theresa Gudavalli,
Assistant Professor , 
Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Hyderabadinstitute of Technology and Management,
Hyderabad,India
 
Godi Subba Rao,
Professor, Department Of Mechanical Engineering,
Hyderabadinstituteof Technology And Management,
Hyderabad,India
