1 
 
1.   Introduction and History of Internal Combustion Engine 
 
The internal combustion engine (Ice) is a heat engine that converts chemical energy in a fuel 
into mechanical energy, usually made available on a rotating output shaft. Chemical energy of 
the fuel is first converted to thermal energy by means of combustion or oxidation with air 
inside the engine. This thermal energy raises the temperature and pressure of the gases within 
the engine, and the high-pressure gas then expands against the mechanical mechanisms of the 
engine. This expansion is converted by the mechanical linkages of the engine to a rotating 
crankshaft, which is the output of the engine. The crankshaft, in turn, is connected to a 
transmission and/or power train to transmit the rotating mechanical energy to the desired final 
use. For engines this will often be the propulsion of a vehicle. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1-1 An Otto Engine from 1920s US Manufacture 
 
 
Internal Combustion Engine, as the name implies, is when fuel is ignited and burnt inside an 
internal combustion engine and the most usual type of fuel is petrol, diesel or gas, as in a gas 
turbine. The earliest internal engines were invented by Jean Joseph Etienne Lenoir (1822-
1900) in the mid 19th century using coal gas as fuel. Gas turbine engines (ones in a jet) were 
devised for some aircraft during the Second World War and are now used in many naval 
ships, aircraft, tanks and speedboats. A petrol (gasoline) combustion engine was devised by 
Gottlieb Daimler (1834-1900) and Wilhelm Maybach (1846-1929) IN 1885. A couple of 
years later, a diesel engine was invented between 1893-97 by Rudolf C. Karl Diesel (1858-
1913), a German mechanical engineer. 
 
 
 
2 
 
1.1   Types of Internal Combustion (IC) Engines 
 
 
There are two main types of IC engines: spark ignition (SI) engines (petrol or gasoline engine) 
and compression ignition (CI) or diesel engine. Both these engines are further classified as 2-
stroke and 4-stroke engine. 
 
Internal Combustion Engines, more popularly known as IC engines, are the ones in which the 
combustion of fuel takes place inside the engine block itself. After combustion of fuel, much 
heat energy is generated, this is converted into mechanical energy. 
 
There are two types of IC engines: rotary and reciprocating engines. In rotary engines, a rotor 
rotates inside the engine to produce power. In the case of the reciprocating engines, a piston 
reciprocates within a cylinder. The reciprocating motion of the piston is converted into the 
rotary motion of the vehicle's wheels. In automobiles, reciprocating engines are used. They 
are the most widely used type of engine. 
 
Reciprocating engines are classified into two types: spark ignition (SI) engines and 
compression ignition (CI) engines. Since reciprocating engines are the most widely used 
engines, they have become synonymous with the name IC engines. It is this reason that even 
the IC engines are broadly classified into two types: SI engines and CI engines. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1-2 Spark Ignition Engine 
 
3 
 
In SI engines the burning of fuel occurs by a spark generated by the spark plug located in the 
cylinder head of engine. Due to this fact they are called spark ignition engines. In these 
engines the fuel used is petrol or gasoline, hence SI engines are also known as Petrol or 
Gasoline Engines. 
 
In the case of CI engines, burning of the fuel occurs because of the high pressure exerted on 
the fuel. The fuel is compressed to high pressures and it starts burning, hence these engines 
are called compression ignition engines. In CI engines the fuel used is diesel; hence they are 
also called Diesel engines.  
 
The SI and CI engines are either two stroke or four stroke engines. In the case of the two 
stroke engine, for every two strokes of the piston inside the cylinder the fuel is burnt. This 
means for every single rotation of the wheel the fuel is burnt. In the case of four-stroke 
engines, the fuel is burnt for every four strokes of the piston inside the cylinder. That means 
each time the fuel is burnt there are two rotations of the wheels of the vehicle. The stroke is 
the distance traveled by the piston inside the cylinder; it is usually equal to the length of the 
cylinder.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1-3 Compression Ignition Engine 
 
 
Since the 4-stroke engines produce two rotations while 2-stroke engine produces single 
rotation each time the fuel is burnt, the efficiency of 4-stroke engines is greater than in 2-
stroke engines. Ideally the efficiency of 4-stroke engine should be double of 2-stroke engine, 
but in actuality it is never so. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
1.1.2   Four-Stroke SI Engine Cycle 
 
The actions in the spark-ignition engine can be divided into four parts. Each part consists of a 
piston stroke. This is the movement of the piston from BDC to TDC, or from TDC to BDC. 
The complete cycle of events in the engine cylinder requires four piston strokes. These are 
intake, compression, power and exhaust. The crankshaft makes two complete revolutions to 
complete the four piston strokes. This makes the engine a fourstroke-cycle engine. It is also 
called a four-stroke or four-cycle engine. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1-4 Four Stroke SI Engine Operation 
 
 
 
Intake Stroke 
 
During the intake stroke of a spark-ignition engine, the piston is moving down. The intake 
valve is open. Air-fuel mixture flows through the intake port and into the cylinder. The fuel 
systems supplies to mixture. As the piston passes through BDC, intake valve closes. This 
seals off the upper end of the cylinder. 
 
 
5 
 
Compression Stroke 
 
After the piston passes BDC, it starts moving up. Both valves are closed. The upward moving 
piston compresses the air-fuel mixture into a smaller space, between the top of the piston and 
the cylinder head. This space is combustion chamber. The mixture is compressed 1/8 or less 
of its original volume. The amount that the mixture is compressed is compression ratio. 
 
Power Stroke 
 
As the piston nears TDC at the end of the compression stroke, an electric spark jumps the gap 
at the spark plug. The heat from the spark ignites the compressed air-fuel mixture. The air-
fuel mixture then burns rapidly. These high temperatures cause very high pressure which 
pushes down the piston. The connecting rod carries this force to the crankshaft, which turns to 
move the drive wheels. 
 
Exhaust Stroke 
 
As the piston approaches BDC on the power stroke, the exhaust valve opens. After passing 
through BDC, the piston moves up again. The burned gases escape through the open exhaust 
port. As the piston nears TDC, the intake valve opens. When the piston passes through TDC 
and starts down again, the exhaust valve closes. 
 
 
 
1.2.2   Four-Stroke CI Engine Cycle 
 
Diesel engines are similar to spark ignition engines in construction. Both have pistons, with 
piston rings, movingup and down in cylinders. Both burn fuel in combustion chambers in the 
upper part of the cylinders. The high pressure produced by the burning fuel pushes the pistons 
down. This rotates the crankshaft and the rotary motion is carried through shafts and gears to 
the drive wheels. 
6 
 
 
 
Figure 1-5 Four Stroke CI Engine Operation 
 
 
Intake Stroke 
 
The diesel engine takes in air alone. No throttle valve impedes the airflow. In the spark-
ignition engine, a mixture of air and fuel enters the engine cyclinders on the intake stroke. The 
throttle valve controls the amount that enters. 
 
 
Compression Stroke 
 
In the diesel engine, the upward-moving piston compresses air alone. On the other hand, in 
the spark ignition engine, the piston compresses the air-fuel mixture. 
 
Power Stroke 
 
In diesel engine, a light oil diesel fuel is injected into the compressed and hot air. The heat of 
compression ignites the fuel. In the spark-ignition engine, a spark  at the spark plug ignites the 
compressed air-fuel mixture. 
 
Exhaust Stroke 
 
The exhaust stroke is the same for both engines. The exhaust valve opens and the burned 
gases flow out as the piston moves up the cyclinder. 
 
 
 
7 
 
1.2.3   Two-Stroke Engine Cycle 
 
The two-stroke petrol engine was very popular throughout the 19th-20th century in 
motorcycles and small-engined devices, such as chainsaws and outboard motors, and was also 
used in some cars, a few tractors and many ships. Part of their appeal was their simple design 
(and resulting low cost) and often high power-to-weight ratio. The lower cost to rebuild and  
aintain made the two stroke engine incredibly popular, until for the USA their EPA mandated 
more stringent emission controls in 1978 (taking effect in 1980) and in 2004 (taking effect in 
2005 and 2010). The industry largely responded by switching to four-stroke petrol engines, 
which emit less pollution. Most small designs use petroil lubrication, with the oil being 
burned in the combustion chamber, causing "blue smoke" and other types of exhaust 
pollution. This is a major reason why two-stroke engines were replaced by four-stroke 
engines in many applications. 
 
Simple two-stroke petrol (gas) engines continue to be commonly used in high-power, 
handheld applications such as string trimmers and chainsaws. The light overall weight, and 
light-weight spinning parts give important operational and even safety advantages. For 
example, a four-stroke engine to power a chainsaw operating in any position would be much 
more expensive and complex than a two-stroke engine that uses a gasoline-oil mixture. 
 
 
Figure 1-6 Two Stroke Engine Operation 
 
 
The basic internal combustion engine is very simple machine, in principle. A piston moving 
up and down within a cylinder is connected (by a connecting rod (con-rod)) to a rotating 
crankshaft. The piston is forced downwards by the expanding gases of a fuel-air mixture 
burning in the cylinder space above it. This causes the crankshaft to rotate. The momentum of 
the rotating crankshaft then forces the piston back up again, allowing the next cycle to ocur. 
Often, a heavy flywheel is attached to the crankshaft, to maintain the momentum of rotation. 
 
8 
 
2.   Introduction to Gasoline Injection System 
 
Fuel injection is a system for admitting fuel into an internal combustion engine. It has become 
the primary fuel delivery system used in automotive engines, having replaced carburetors 
during the 1980s and 1990s. A variety of injection systems have existed since the earliest 
usage of the internal combustion engine. The primary difference between carburetors and fuel 
injection is that fuel injection atomizes the fuel by forcibly pumping it through a small nozzle 
under high pressure, while a carburetor relies on suction created by intake air accelerated 
through a Venturi tube to draw the fuel into the airstream.  
 
 
2.1   Fuel System Developments 
 
The carburetor was almost universally used on petrol engines through until the late 1970s, 
when fuel injection systems began to appear on mass produced vehicles. Electronic injection 
was, however, used in the late 1960s to overcome emission control problems with some 
vehicles intended for the American market. In the 1970s a Bosch mechanical/hydraulic 
system (Bosch K-Jetronic) gained favour with many European manufacturers: this system 
tended to lead the way until the early 1980s, when a new generation of electronic injection 
systems progressively became more common. It is suggested that the first application of fuel 
injection was on the engine that was used by the Wright Brothers for the first manned flight of 
an aeroplane. However, simple carburetors were very much the only petrol delivery systems 
used on mass production vehicle engines for many years. Although diesel engines used a 
mechanical injection system until fairly recently, petrol engines relied on carburettor systems 
because of cost, simplicity and the fact that there was no need for high pressure delivery of 
petrol.  
 
A number of cars did use petrol injection, but these were generally racing cars and not 
production vehicles. One notable exception, however, was in the mid-1950s, when Mercedes-
Benz used an adaptation of a mechanical diesel pump on its racing engines and also on a 
limited production sports car (Mercedes 300SL); it is interesting to note that these systems 
were adaptations of diesel mechanical pump systems, which injected fuel directly into the 
cylinder and not into the intake system, which has been the general principle for most 
electronic injection systems until recently.  
 
 
So, although fuel injection was not widely used, Mercedes and a number of vehicle and racing 
engine manufacturers continued to develop the use of fuel injection for petrol engines. 
Various mechanical and electronic systems used from the early 1960s through to the 1980s 
were developed to improve emissions for vehicles sold in the United States. 
 
9 
 
It was, however, the introduction of European emissions regulations that effectively forced 
the use of fuel injection systems on almost all petrol engines by the early 1990s. By this time, 
electronic control was becoming less expensive and it was therefore inevitable that any 
mechanical systems would be replaced by electronic injection systems. 
 
 
2.2   Mechanical Fuel Systems 
 
Engines works on fuel. The earliest form of fuel supply mechanism for modern automobile is 
carburetor. The primary function of carburetor is to provide the air-fuel mixture to the engine 
in the required proportion. The carburetor is the part of the engine where fuel is mixed with 
air before it enters the engine case. The air passes though the opening at the top of the 
carburetor and enters the venturi, a long tapered tube that speeds up the airflow into the 
engine. The increase in air velocity causes a drop in pressure, which draws the fuel from the 
tank. In the middle of the venturi (at the low-pressure zone) is a brass tube assembly called 
the spray bar. The fuel passes through the spray-bar jet and then mixes with the incoming air.  
 
The air portion of the air/fuel mixture is regulated by the large aluminum barrel  that rotates to 
increase and decrease the size of the intake hole. The flow of fuel is adjusted by one or two 
needle valves at one or both ends of the spray bar.  
 
 
Figure 2-1 Carburetor 
 
10 
 
Older 2-stroke engines (and many 4-strokes) have a single high-end needle valve to adjust the 
mixture at full throttle and a small air-bleed hole in the front of the carburetor to adjust the 
idle mixture. As the throttle barrel closes, it opens the air-bleed hole to the venturi. A small 
idle-mixture screw meters the amount of air entering the carburetor. Opening the air-bleed 
hole lets more air in and leans the idle mixture, and closing it lets less air in to richen the 
mixture. 
 
Two-needle carburetors (as the name implies) are equipped with two needle valves, one for 
the high-end mixture adjustment, and a secondary low-end needle valve (sometimes referred 
to as the low-speed needle) to adjust the idle mixture. When you turn the high-end needle 
clockwise (screwing it in), it leans the mixture by restricting the amount of fuel that enters the 
carburetor. Turning it counterclockwise (unscrewing it) richens the mixture by allowing more 
fuel to flow. Usually, the low-end needle is smaller than the high-end needle, and in some  
cases, you’ll need a fine-tip screwdriver to adjust the idle mixture because it is  recessed into 
the center of the throttle arm. When you turn the low-end needle  clockwise, it richens the idle 
mixture, and turning it counterclockwise makes the mixture lean. 
 
When the throttle barrel is closed, it also moves laterally, which in turn moves the low-end 
needle gradually into the fixed spray bar, thus leaning the idle mixture. Of the two types of 
carburetor, the two-needle type is more sensitive to adjustments and provides faster throttle 
response through the midrange.  
 
Expected Features of Carburetor System 
 
 Ease of cold starting 
 
 All operating ranges of the supply air-fuel mixture at the desired rate 
 
 The suction of fuel to air is totally ensuring pulvuriz 
 
 The mix ratio required in the provision of sudden acceleration 
 
 Ensuring economical engine idling as possible 
 
 Ease of cleaning and servicing requirements easily removable 
 
11 
 
Provided in the carburetor mixture is too rich or too poor creates engine some negativity. 
Excess air factor λ> 1.15 requirement is defined as the mixture too lean mixture and start the 
engine with the mixture of these conditions occurs to following negative. 
 
 Because of increase in a lean mixture combustion time and as a result of incomplete 
combustion in the cylinder, the exhaust begins with a flashback 
 
 At the exhaust period, the continued combustion of the exhaust valve causes to 
destruction into surfaces leads due to extreme temperatures 
 
 In particular, the increase of temperature in the exhaust valve can caused the 
emergence of uncontrolled ignition.such as knocking or pre-ignition 
 
The mixture is too rich, approximately λ <0.84 the following conditions, causes to the 
emergence of negative 
. 
 Wall of the combustion chamber and the piston surface is sooty. Cylinder and piston is 
accelerated to wear on the surface 
 The carbon layer deposition on the walls of the combustion chamber causes the 
occurrence of uncontrolled ignition 
 
 Failure to achieve complete combustion, exhaust gas emissions of harmful CO and 
unburned HC causes to increase in percent. So that air pollution increases 
 
 Especially in warm-up period of the engine, the excessive gasoline entered into 
cylinder causes getting lower the viscosity of lubricating oil in the cylinder wall 
 
 The fuel consumption will increase 
 
 
2.2.1   The Working Principle of the Carburetor 
 
The carburetor has several functions; firstly it combines gasoline and air creating a highly 
combustible mixture, secondly it regulates the ratio of air and fuel, and thirdly it controls the 
engine's speed. 
 
12 
 
When the piston moves down the cylinder on the intake stroke it draws air from the cylinder 
and intake manifold. A vacuum is created that draws air from the carburetor. The airflow 
through the carburetor causes fuel to be drawn from the carburetor through the intake 
manifold past the intake valves and into the cylinder. The amount of fuel mixed into the air to 
obtain the required air to fuel ratio is controlled by the venturi or choke. When air flows 
through the venturi its speed increases and the pressure drops. This causes the fuel to be 
sucked into the air stream from a hole or jet. When the engine is at idle or at rapid 
acceleration there is not enough air passing through the venturi to draw fuel. To overcome 
these problems other systems are used. 
 
 
Figure 2-2 Working Principle of the Carburetor 
 
Gasoline is delivered to the carburetor by the fuel pump and is stored in the fuel bowl.         
To keep this level of fuel stored in the bowl constant under all conditions a float system is 
used. A float operated needle valve and seat at the fuel inlet is used to control the fuel level in 
the bowl. If the fuel level drops below a certain level the float lowers and opens the valve 
letting more fuel in. When the float rises it pushes the inlet valve against the seat and shuts off 
the flow of fuel into the bowl. 
The throttle controls the speed of the engine by controlling the amount of air fuel allowed in 
the engine. The throttle is a butterfly valve located after the venturi and is opened by pressing 
on the gas pedal. The farther the valve is opened the more air/fuel mixture is let into the 
engine and the faster the engine runs. At low engine speeds when the throttle is only open a 
little there is not enough air flow to pull in fuel. 
 
13 
 
When the engine is idle there is very little air flowing through the venturi because the throttle 
valve is closed. The idle port allows the engine to operate under this condition. Fuel is forced 
through the idle port because of a pressure differential between air in the fuel bowl and 
vacuum below the throttle valve. Idle fuel mixture is controlled by an adjustable needle valve. 
At higher engine speeds more fuel is drawn from the main nozzle. Fuel comes from the fuel 
bowl through the fuel nozzle and into the throat of the carburetor where it mixes with air. 
 
 
2.3   Electronic Fuel Injection Systems 
 
Constantly changing and evolving from the 1930s to the present system, the fuel system, to 
power the vehicle's engine performance, fuel consumption and emission reduction or 
environmentally significant improvements in terms become. 
 
Today, many of the vehicles being used in electronic systems is advantageous in many ways 
based on mechanical fuel injection system, only disadvantage of electronic systems is 
expensive. European emission standards to ensure the use of electronic systems today due to 
favorable operating performance and has become almost mandatory.  
 
The Advantages of Electronic Fuel Injection Systems 
 
To sum it itemise the advantages of electronic fuel injection systems will be briefly as 
follows: 
 
 Reduction of exhaust gas emissions 
 
 More economical fuel consumption 
 
 To increase the specific power of the engine 
 
 Fast reaction to different load conditions 
 
 Easy starting and warming 
 
 Knock control 
 
14 
 
 Idle control and adaptation 
 
 Does not require adjustments 
 
 Ease of diagnostics 
 
 No altitude effect 
 
 Better mix adjustment 
 
The Disadvantages of Electronic Fuel Injection Systems 
 
The only disadvantage of electronic fuel injection systems is an expensive system. In addition, 
this system is not available in most parts repair facilities. In case of failure the most parts have 
to change. For this reason, electronic fuel injection system in the vehicle is used more in 
developed countries. Nowadays, vehicles are being produced in our country have electronic 
fuel injection systems, in underdeveloped and developing countries, electronic fuel injection 
systems in vehicle are rare. 
 
The Differences Between Carburetor and Electronic Injection Systems  
 
The most important difference between the carburetor and injection system is air-fuel mixing 
formats and location. Air sucked through the air filter in the caburetor system, when amount 
of fuel passing from the carburetor and the mixture is distributed to the cylinders  carried 
along by the intake manifold.  
 
In injection, fuel is sprayed to air  from intake manifold when entering the combustion 
chamber. New direct injection petrol engines (FSI), the fuel is sprayed into the combustion 
chamber. 
The main principle of the injection system is that deliver to fuel  into the cylinder in the form 
of particles as small as possible. Thus, the fuel can be burned with highest efficient. Also in 
the combustion chamber the air-fuel mixture distributed homogeneously, particularly in diesel 
engines, prevents burns regional.  
 
15 
 
Life of the engine increases and the combustion of the fuel can be a portion of the emission 
rates can be adjusted downwards. Injection system compared to carburetor systems averagely 
"%5 to up to %15" provides fuel economy. 
 
 
2.3.1   D-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
The D-Jetronic system uses constant fuel pressure and flow, so that only injection duration 
needs to be modified to control air/fuel mixture. The D-Jetronic system measures incoming 
airflow by monitoring intake manifold pressure.  
Engine speed, temperature, and other factors are monitored for the purpose of fine-tuning 
injection duration. An auxiliary air valve, cold start injector and thermotime switch aid in cold 
starting and operation. 
 
 
Figure 2-3   D-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
Air intake temperature sensor : The air temperature sensor provides control unit with 
information about air temperature, so that control unit can increase the injection quantity as 
necessary at low intake air temperature. This compensation ceases when intake air 
temperature is greater than 2O0C. 
 
16 
 
Throttle valve switch : The throttle valve switch is mounted on the throttle housing. This 
switch signals the control unit of throttle position. During deceleration, above 1500 RPM, 
throttle switch cuts fuel supply off and below 900 RPM, fuel supply is turned on. 
 
Auxiliary air valve : During cold starts, the auxiliary air valve opens to allow additional air 
into the inlet duct. As engine heats up, a bi-metallic element expands and closes valve. At 
approximately 140F (80C) the auxiliary air pipe is completely closed by the valve. 
 
Triggering contacts : The triggering contacts are located in the distributor. They provide 
signals which determine when and to which cylinder fuel is to be injected. The contacts also 
supply information concerning engine speed to determine the amount of fuel that needs to be 
injected into the engine. 
 
 
2.3.2   K-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
Naturally aspirated engines are fitted with K-Jetronic continuous fuel injection system.         
K-Jetronik system is a mechanically and hydraulically controlled fuel injeciion system that  
requires no form of drive. The basic principle of operation is that the accelerator pedal 
controls the movement of the throttle plates which regulate the amount of air drawn into the 
engine. An air flow sensor fitted upstream of the throttle plates, monitors the quantity of 
intake air entering the system. Dependent upon the volume of air metered, a fuel distributor 
apportions a quantity of fuel to the injector adjacent to each cylinder.  
 
The air flow sensor and the fuel distributor are combined into one assembly known as the 
mixture control unit.The precisely metered quantity of fuel is continuously sprayed from the 
injectors in a finely atomized form into the induction manifold behind the engine inlet valves. 
Theairffuel mixture is then drawn into the engine cylinders whenever an inlet valve opens.  
 
Cars fitted with a catalytic converter also have a closed loop (lambda control) system. This 
system accurately controls the airlfuel ratio about the stoichiometric value which is necessary 
to achieve efficient operation of the three-way catalytic converter. 
 
 
17 
 
K-Jetronic Fuel Injection System Operation 
 
When the engine starts to run at cold weather condition, the mixture sticks to the manifold and 
the cylinder wall by concentrating. Therefore, the amount of fuel in the mixture is decreased 
to lead to the impoverishment of the mixture. To resolve this negativity, it is sprayed from      
a second injector for enriching to the mixture. This injector continues to run just when engine 
is cold or until the engine reaches certain temperature with help of heat-sensitive valf.  
 
After reaching a certain temperature, the additional fuel injector is disabled. The heating 
regulator provides a rich mixture until it reaches the required temperature after this injector is 
disabled. The heating regulator makes rich mixture by decreasing to control pressure. 
 
The metal plates are taken up when air passes through inlet duct at normal operating state. It 
is controlled to the fuel distributor via a shaft. As the amount of air passing through the 
channel get more, metal plates lift up and push up to shaft which attached to it. This shaft 
provide to injector more fuel by opening channels more in the fuel distributor. In order to 
increase the engine speed, more mixture will obtained. 
 
 
Figure 2-4   K-Jetronic Fuel Injection 
 
18 
 
The acceleration is provided when gas throttle is opened suddenly by most opened plate of the 
sensor case. When the throttle is opened suddenly, the high pressure difference between 
intake manifold, cylinder and air intake side creates sudden an air flow. In the meantime, the 
plate will reach the highest level makes further increase as making a slow gas. This sensor 
allows to transmit extra fuel by connected with the shaft. In this way a rich mixture is 
obtained which is required for acceleration. The movement of sensor plate becomes available 
to throttle position. 
 
Fuel shut off is a system to prevent unnecessary fuel consumption at downhill or when take 
your foot off the gas. In K-Jetronik system, the fuel is cut by disabling the sensor plate which 
adjusts fuel distribution. The breaker switch is on duty to on/off by-pass duct. 
 
The fuel accumulator  : The fuel accumulator has two functions, (i) to dampen the pulsation 
of the fuel flow, generated by the pump and (ii) to maintain fuel pressure after the engine has 
been switched off. This prevents a vapour lock developing with consequent hot starting 
problems.  
 
The fuel filter : The fuel filter incorporates two paper filter elements to ensure that the fuel 
reaching the injection system components is completely free from dirt.  
 
The fuel distributor/mixture control assembly : The fuel distributor controls the quantity of 
fuel being delivered to the engine, ensuring that each cylinder receives the same amount. The 
mixture control assembly incorporates an air sensor plate and control plunger. The air sensor 
plate is located in the main airstream between the air cleaner and the throttle butterfly. During 
idling, the airflow lifts the sensor plate which in turn raises a control plunger which allows 
fuel to flow past the plunger and out of the metering slits to the injector valves. Increases in 
engine speed cause increased airflow which raises the control plunger and so admits more 
fuel. 
 
The throttle valve assembly : The throttle valve assembly is mounted in the main air inlet 
between the mixture control assembly and the air box.  
 
The air box : It is mounted on the top of the engine and functions as an auxiliary inlet 
manifold directing air from the sensor plate to each individual cylinder. The warm-up 
regulator is located on the inlet manifold and incorporates two coil springs, a bi-metal strip 
and a control pressure valve.  
19 
 
The regulator controls the fuel supplied to the control circuit which provides pressure 
variations to the fuel distributor control plunger. When the coil springs are pushing against the 
control pressure valve there is a high control pressure and this gives a weak mixture. The coil 
spring pressure application is controlled by the bi-metal strip which in turn is activated in 
accordance with engine temperature and an electrical heat coil. 
 
The auxiliary air device : The auxiliary air device is located on the inlet manifold. It consists 
of a pivoted plate, bi-metal strip and heater coil. The purpose of this device is to supply an 
increased volüme of fuel/air mixture during cold idling. 
 
The start valve : The start valve system consists of an electrical injector and a thermo-time 
switch. Its purpose is to spray fuel into the air box to assist cold starting, the thermo-time 
switch regulating the amount of fuel injected.  
 
The safety module : The safety module is located under the facia panel on the driver’s side 
and is coloured purple (see illustration). Its purpose is to shut off the power supply to the fuel 
pump should the engine stall or the vehicle be involved in an accident. The module senses 
ignition pulses, and cuts the fuel supply if the ignition pulses stop. 
 
The fuel shut-off valve system : The fuel shut-off valve system is an economy device 
whereby air is drawn from within the air cleaner unit through the shut-off valve and directed 
into the ducting chamber above the air sensor plate causing a depression. This then causes the 
sensor plate to drop which, in turn, shuts off the fuel supply. The valve is operated by signals 
from a coolant temperature sensor and a throttle position sensor. The shut-off valve will only 
operate under the following circumstances: 
 
 When the engine coolant temperature is at or above 35°C (95°F) 
 
 When the throttle is closed and with the engine speed decelerating from speeds above 
1600 rpm 
 
The engine speed is sensed by a speed sensing module which is coloured black and located 
beneath the facia panel on the driver’s side. 
 
 
20 
 
2.3.3   KE-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
Electronically controlled mechanical fuel injection. The  ECU can be either analog or digital, 
and the system may or may not have closed-loop lambda control. The system is based on the 
K-Jetronic mechanical system, with the addition of an electro-hydraulic actuator, that varies 
the fuel pressure supplied to the mechanical injection components based on several inputs 
(engine speed, air pressure, coolant temperature, throttle position, lambda etc.) via the ECU. 
With the electronics disconnected, this system will operate as a K-Jetronic system.  
 
Injection system must inject the correct amount of fuel depend on different conditions. 
Whereas the increase in engine power was the main object at the start of development work 
on gasoline injection. Toxic emission and fuel consumption issues are also important. 
Previous mechanical systems are not able to fulfill these stringent requirements. So, the well-
proven K-Jetronic was retained as the basic injection system. Uprated to a more intelligent 
and  efficient system by the addition of electronic circuitry. This synthesis, comprising the 
mechanical basic functions coupled with electronic adaptation and optimization functions, is 
the KE-Jetronic. 
 
 
Figure 2-5   KE-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
21 
 
KE-Jetronic system components which are added to K-Jetronic system : 
 
 Air flow measurement potentiometer 
 
 Electro-hydraulic adjuster 
 
 A second pressure regulator 
 
 Temperature sensor 
 
The electro-hydraulic control device is  given amount of drive and a certain amount of fuel 
required for working status is shipped by evaluating the signals sent to the electronic control 
unit with all of these additional systems. 
 
 
KE-Jetronic Fuel Injection System Operation 
 
A mechanical hydraulic injection system provides the basis for KE- Jetronic the same as it 
does for K-Jetronic. The stream of air drawn by the engine deflects a sensor plate, which in 
turns controls the fuel metering plunger. Depending upon its position, this plunger opens or 
closes the fuel metering slits. 
 
The basic function of KE-Jetronic is to meter the fuel to the engine dependent upon the 
quantity of air drawn by the engine. But in contrast to K-Jetronic also takes a number of 
additional engine operating data into account by means of sensors. The output signals from 
these signals are processed by an  ECU controlling  an elctrohydraulic pressure actuator 
which adapts the injected fuel quantity to the various operating conditions. 
 
In case of malfunction, the KE-Jetronic operates solely with the basic function , and the driver 
then has a system at this disposal which provides good limp-home capabilities when the 
engine is warm.  
 
 
 
22 
 
Advantages of the KE-Jetronic System 
 
 Lower – fuel consumption 
With the KE- Jetronic, each cylinder is allocated its own fuel injection valve which injects 
continually onto the intake valve. The injected fuel vaporizes and mixes intensively with the 
air drawn in by the piston. 
 
 Rapid adaptation to operating conditions 
The system prepares  the injected fuel value  depend on working conditions.(starting, 
warming, acceleration,cold weather conditions etc.) That provides rapid  adaptation. 
 
 Cleaner exhaust gases 
The required air-fuel mixture is precisely maintained at the level necessary for minimum toxic 
emissions by reducing post-start enrichment as soon as possible or by the rapid response of 
the accerelation enrichment. 
 
 Higher output power per liter 
The efficiently designed air-intake system of KE-Jetronic permits an increase in power due to 
improved cylinder charge. 
 
Mixture adjustment : In KE-Jetronic system adjustment, except of making the mixture 
depending on depending on operating conditions and cold starting are different from             
K-Jetronik system. The electronic control unit evaluate to the signals which are required 
physical changes of the mixture. The amount of fuel to be sprayed is determined according to 
the values stored in the memory. 
 
Cold-start enrichment : During a cold start, the air-fuel mixture drawn in by the engine 
leans off. This is due to the low turbulence at crancking speeds causing poor mixture of the 
fuel particles with the air and to the minimal evoparation of the fuel and wetting of the 
cylinder walls and intake ports with fuel at low temperatures. 
 
23 
 
Acceleration : During acceleration, the KE-Jetronic meters additional fuel to the engine as 
long as it is still cold. Accerelation enrichment by means of the pressure actuator. If the 
throttle is opened abruptly the air fuel mixture is momentarily leaned-off and a short period of 
mixture enrichment is needed to ensure good transitional response. 
 
Warm-up enrichment : During warm-up, the engine receives extra fuel depending upon the 
temperature, the load, and the engine speed. 
 
Full load : The engine delivers its max power at full load when the air fuel mixture must be 
enriched compared to that at part load. Full load enrichment by means of the pressure 
actuator: In contrast to part load, where the calibration is for minimum fuel consumption and 
low emissions at full load it is necessary to enrich the air fuel mixture. 
 
Idle speed control : The idle-mixture control stabilizes the idle speed and thus reduces fuel 
consumption at idle, particularly in town traffic. Depending upon the deviation of idle speed 
from the set value, the riactuator supplies the engine with more or less intake air through a 
bypass around the throttle valve. It takes over the function of axualiary-air device which is no 
longer needed. 
 
Engine speed limiting : When a present engine speed is reached the ECU suppresses the fuel 
injection pulses. Adaptation of the air-fuel mixture at high altitudes : The low density of the 
air at high altitudes necessitates a leaner air-fuel mixture. 
 
Clean emissions : The less complete the combustion, the higher is the emission of toxic 
substances in the exhaust gas. Perfect or total combustion  is impossible even when surplus air 
is available in plenty. In order to reduce the load on the environment it is imperative that 
engine exhaust gas emissions are reduced  drastically. 
 
Comparison of KE-Jetronic System against K-Jetronic System 
 
 The control process is made to hydraulic pressure drop at measuring range of the fuel 
distributor by electro-hydraulic pressure regulator 
 
 K-Jetronic’s warm up regulator is cancelled 
 
24 
 
 A diaphragm type pressure regulator with the flat control feature provides the main 
pressure and control pressure 
 
 The feeder neddle type of  pressure regulator is canceled in K-Jetronic 
 
 The system responds very quickly to load changes 
 
 
2.3.4   KE-Motronic Fuel Injection System 
 
KE-Motronic fuel injection system is such as KE-Jetronic system which added lambda 
control, mapping-electronic ignition system, knock control, fuel vapor control and speed 
sensor. The improved system operation as described in general above show a some 
differences, although the automatic adjustment and operation of these circuits in terms of 
added.   
 
 
2.3.5   L-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
L-Jetronic was often called Air-Flow Controlled (AFC) injection to further separate it from 
the pressure-controlled D-Jetronic ,. In the system, air flow into the engine is measured by a 
movable vane (indicating engine load) known as the mass air flow sensor (MAF). The L- 
Jetronik is an electronically controlled fuel-injection system which injects fuel intermittently 
into the intake ports. It does not require any form of drive. It combines the advantages of 
direct air-flow sensing and the special capabilities affored by electronics. 
 
L-Jetronic Fuel Injection System Operation 
 
A pump supplies fuel to the engine and creates  the pressure necessary for injection . Injection 
valves inject the fuel into the individual intake tubes. An ECU  controls the injection valves. 
The basic operation is straightforward. An engine is basically an air pump, drawing mixed 
fuel and air into the intake manifold, compressing it (followed by a spark-triggered 
explosion), and expelling it through the exhaust manifold. In a fuel injection system the entire 
operation is based on the amount of air entering the system.  
25 
 
The engine pulls air through an air filter and into an air flow meter. The air flow meter 
measures the amount of air entering the system. Once measured, the air flows into a large 
hose that is connected to the intake manifold (a plenum). The intake manifold has a throttle 
plate that is connected to the driver's foot (the accelerator pedal). The position of this plate 
determines how much air is drawn into the manifold. Air is then passed into one of four 
barrels connecting the manifold to the cylinder head. A fuel injector is positioned each barrel 
and, as air passes through, fuel is sprayed for a specific amount of time into the air stream. 
 
Advantages of the L-Jetronic System 
 
 Low fuel consumption 
 Low pollution exhaust gas 
 Adaption to operating conditions 
 Higher power output per liter 
 
26 
 
 
Figure 2-6   L-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
Throttle and idle control : Throttle opens to allow more air to sucked in to engine. Small 
amount of air      by- passes the throttle so the engine gets air and will idle. Screw on side of 
throttle adjusts idlespeed. Auxiliary air valve bypasses more air during warm-up to 
compensate for thicker oil.  
 
WOT (wide open throttle) switches : Idle switch is used for coasting fuel-cutoff. When 
switch is closed (throttle closed), fuel is cut until engine rpm drops below ECU specified 
value. If idle is set too high, the coasting fuel-cut off with cause the idle to cycle up and down 
as the ECU cuts fuel until idle drops below spec, then fuel resumes, RPM rise above specified 
and fuel is cut again.  
27 
 
Vane air flow sensor : Measures the amount of air passing through the engine air intake with 
a metering vane placed in the air stream. This vane is held in a rest position by a spring. When 
air passes  the vane is rotated against the spring pressure. The vane is connected to a slider of 
a potentiometer. One end of the carbon track is connected to the power supply and the other to 
ground. When the vane moves, the slider is pushed along the carbon track and changes the 
signal voltage according to the amount of passing air. This signal voltage is used by the 
engine control unit (ECU) to calculate the amount of air flowing into the combustion 
chambers. 
 
Warm up Idle compensation : During Warm-up, engine oil is thicker adding load to engine  
Auxiliary air valve by-passes throttle for additional air (like mini - throttle) while warming up. 
This brings idle speed up to desirable level electrical heating element inside valve combined 
with engine heat bend bi-metal strip causing valve to close. This happens gradually reducing 
amount of throttle ‘help’. Once warm, valve is closed. 
 
Warm up enrichment : Coolant temperature sensor mounted in thermostat housing. Sensor 
has high resistance when cold and low when warm.  Connections do get intermittent-check for 
corrosion components-coolant temperature sensor. 
 
Fuel injectors : Open when energized by ECU- not continuous as K-Jetronic system. Current 
through windings causes magnetism pulling armature and attached needle valve up and way 
from valve seat allowing fuel to flow. Can test with magnet on a stick. All injectors are wired 
together and fire simultaneously, flow is determined by pressure across injector and time 
(dwell) of opening. 
 
Differences of L-Jetronic System against K-Jetronic System 
 
 Electronic Fuel Injection (EFI) 
 
 Pulses of fuel are injected 
 
 The duration and frequency of the pulses are controlled entirely electronicly 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
2.3.6   LH-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
LH-Jetronic is a newly designed fuel injection system. It utilizes a combination of all the best 
features known today. It operates with a moderate fuel pressure which is held constant by a 
line pressure regulator. Injection is by means of electrically controlled solenoid valves in the 
injectors which squirt fuel close to engine intake valves. The injection duration can be 
measured in milli seconds and is controlled by an electronic control unit.  
 
Figure 2-7   LH-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
The electronic control receives signals on various driving, engine and ambient conditions 
from a set of sensors. Most important is the air mass meter. It utilizes a system that 
continuously measures the mass. This is accomplished by a platinum wire filament which is 
located in the intake air stream. It is held at a certain temperature above intake air temperature 
by a system of amplifiers, resistors and comparators. The current needed to do thid is 
measured and a corresponding signal sent to the electronic control unit.  
 
When the engine stops, dirt build-up on the platinum wire filament is burned off by 
electrically raising the filament temperature to 19200F for less than one second. If dirt was 
allowed to stay on the filament, false signals would be received and the electronic control unit 
would order incorrect air-fuel mixture. 
29 
 
2.3.7   Mono-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
Jetronic fuel injection systems have proved their worth in millions of vehicles since they were 
introduced. This is a direct result of the advantages inherent in fuel injection with regard to 
present-day demands for economic efficiency, performance and, not least important, cleaner 
exhaust emissions. The Mono-Jetronic is an electronically controlled single-point fuel 
injection system in which a solenoid-operated fuel injector injects the fuel at a central point 
above the throttle valve. It is an economically priced system and is particularly suitable for 
small and medium-sized vehicles. When driving conditions change, and when the engine gets 
older, using lambda closed-loop control, the Mono-Jetronic always guarantees the correct   
air-fuel mixture. 
 
Mono-Jetronic Fuel Injection System Operation 
 
Mono-Jetronic fuel injection is an electronically controlled, low pressure, single point 
injection (SPI) system for 4 cylinder engines. While port injection systems such as             
KE-Jetronic and L-Jetronic fuel injection employ a separate injector for each cylinder,          
Mono-Jetronic features a single, centrally-located, solenoid-controlled injection valve for the 
entire engine.  
 
The heart of the Mono-Jetronic is the central injection unit (described in the following ). It 
uses a single solenoid operated injector for intermittent fuel injection above the throttle valve. 
The intake manifold distributes the fuel to the individual cylinders.  
 
30 
 
 
Figure 2-8   Mono-Jetronic Fuel Injection System 
 
A variety of different sensors are used to monitor engine operation and furnish the essential 
control parameters for optimum mixture adaptation. Input circuits in the ECU convert the 
sensor data for transmission to the microprocessor, which analyzes the operating data to 
determine current engine operating conditions; this information, in turn, provides the basis for 
calculating control signals to the various final-control elements (actuators). Output amplifiers 
process the signals for transmission to the injector, throttle-valve actuator and canister-purge 
valve. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
2.3.8   Motronic Fuel Injection System 
 
Motronic is the injection system is the most developed L-Jetronic System and a combination 
of the ignition system. Motronic are available as in 1.7 and 3.2 versions. The heart of this 
system is the microcomputer which controls to basic motor information and having an ability 
to measure the amount of injected fuel. This information takes place after testing by engineers 
pouring over a map gives the possibility to control all movements easily. 
 
The flowmeter in the first system was the same L and LH. LH was performed as in the system 
then this piece. The basic difference of motronic system is set to advance adjustment by the 
electronic control unit of the system. The sensors which are located motronic system gives 
informationabout the amount of air entering the engine, engine speed, crankshaft position, 
engine and air temperature. Micro computer is a calculator which have capacity to calculate 
the best ignition timing and amount of fuel to be sprayed at this time.  
 
Motronic control unit input signals for calculating the injection time : 
 
 Air mass meter-engine load signal 
 
 Intake air temperature 
 
 The signal from the throttle control unit 
 
 Engine speed sensor signal 
 
 Cooling water temperature 
 
 The signals of the lambda probe 
 
 The accelerator pedal signal 
 
 State of sensor signals 
 
The system is totaly electronic and the current is carried by a microprocessor that controls all 
digital. Motronic fuel injection system compared to L-jetronic, the ignition-performance 
optimizations values taken into under certain operating conditions required.  
32 
 
The amount of fuel determined by methods known is taken into account the most appropriate 
ignition timing  at enrichment mode (Idle, full-load). The five key elements is performed to 
catch an optimum point of hhis determination process in terms of the following : 
 
 Torque 
 
 Knocking 
 
 Exhaust emissions 
 
 Fuel consumption 
 
 Adaption of different working condition 
 
Motronic system prepares poor mixing ratio at partial loads or stoichiometric mixture is 
prepared homogeneous distribution at full-load. In this application, specific fuel consumption 
reduction will be possible to achieve the level of up to 40%. Fuel can be injected directly into 
the cylinders with the high pressure injectors which is electromagnetically controlled. A warm 
wire is used to measure accurately to the incoming air for air mass measurement.  
 
In cold starting, the starter motor is supplied with velocity is very volatile. The control unit 
does not consider this change. It only produces output signals depending on the engine 
temperature by a factor of fixed value. At additional injector for cold starting, the amount of 
fuel in thermal systems without time switch is adjusted by ECU and main injector. The 
change in amount of fuel during cold start is determined according to total number of 
revolution from the first ignition, the starter motor driven speed and the engine temperature. 
33 
 
 
Figure 2-9   Motronic Fuel Injection System 
 
The enrichment is carried out according to engine speed at full-load codition. The values, 
which are corrected by the amount of air and temperature. The correction is made according 
to temperature in cases where knock.  
 
 
34 
 
At idle, the rich fuel mixture is provided according to necessary for good transition from 
smooth operation to high load conditions by superior ability to adjust ignition timing in 
motronic fuel injection system but if it does not have cut-off it needs to arrangement of little 
increasing amount of fuel depending of engine speed at deceleration so that combustion is 
improved, the vehicle exhaust emission and the ability of drive increase. 
 
 
3.   Introduction to Diesel Injection System 
 
The reasons behind the diesel powered vehicle’s continuing success can be reduced to one 
common denominator. Diesels use considerably less fuel than their gasoline powered 
counterparts. And in the meantime the diesel has practically caught up with the gasoline 
engine when it comes to starting and running refinement. Regarding exhaust gas emissions, 
the diesel engine is just as good as a gasoline engine with catalytic converter. In some cases, it 
is even better. The diesel engine’s emissions of CO2, which is responsible for the           
“green-house effect”, are also lower than for the gasoline engine, although this is a direct 
result of the diesel engine’s better fuel economy. It was also possible during the past few 
years to considerably lower the particulate emissions which are typical for the diesel engine.  
 
The popularity of the high-speed diesel engine in the passenger car though, would have been 
impossible without the diesel fuel-injection systems from Bosch. The very high level of 
precision inherent in the distributor pump means that it is possible to precisely meter 
extremely small injection quantities to the engine. And thanks to the special governor 
installed with the VE-pump in passenger car applications, the engine responds immediately to 
even the finest change in accelerator-pedal setting. All points which contribute to the 
sophisticated handling qualities of a modernday automobile. 
 
The Electronic Diesel Control (EDC) also plays a decisive role in the overall improvement of 
the diesel engined passenger car. 
 
35 
 
 
Figure 3-1   Diesel Engine Fuel Injection System   
 
The following pages will deal with the design and construction of the VE distributor pump, 
and how it adapts injected fuel quantity, start-of-injection, and duration of injection to the 
different engine operating conditions. Diesel engines are characterized by their high levels of 
economic efficiency. This is of particular importance in commercial applications. Diesel 
engines are employed in a wide range of different versions. 
 
 
3.1   Mechanical and Electronic Injection 
 
Older engines make use of a mechanical fuel pump and valve assembly which is driven by the 
engine crankshaft, usually via the timing belt or chain. These engines use simple injectors 
which are basically very precise spring-loaded valves which will open and close at a specific 
fuel pressure. The pump assembly consists of a pump which pressurizes the fuel, and a disc-
shaped valve which rotates at half crankshaft speed. The valve has a single aperture to the 
pressurized fuel on one side, and one aperture for each injector on the other. As the engine 
turns the valve discs will line up and deliver a burst of pressurized fuel to the injector at the 
cylinder about to enter its power stroke. The injector valve is forced open by the fuel pressure 
and the diesel is injected until the valve rotates out of alignment and the fuel pressure to that 
injector is cut off.  
Engine speed is controlled by a third disc, which rotates only a few degrees and is controlled 
by the throttle lever. This disc alters the width of the aperture through which the fuel passes, 
and therefore how long the injectors are held open before the fuel supply is cut, controlling 
the amount of fuel injected. 
36 
 
This contrasts with the more modern method of having a separate fuel pump (or set of pumps) 
which supplies fuel constantly at high pressure to each injector. Each injector then has a 
solenoid which is operated by an electronic control unit, which enables more accurate control 
of injector opening times depending on other control conditions such as engine speed and 
loading, resulting in better engine performance and fuel economy. This design is also 
mechanically simpler than the combined pump and valve design, making it generally more 
reliable, and less noisy, than its mechanical counterpart. 
 
 
3.2   Improvement of Diesel Injection System 
 
With an analytic approach a new high pressure fuel injection system called APCRS was 
developed to fulfill these requirements (Mahr, Dürnholz, Polach and Grieshaber, 2000). The 
hydraulic layout of the pressure amplified development tool is apart from the amplifier piston 
modules similar to the standard Common Rail System but with a middle rail pressure. In each 
injector amplifier modules are integrated to generate high injection pressures determined by a 
stepped piston. 
 
The amplifier is activated by a second solenoid valve in the injector. Without activating this 
solenoid the injection system acts as a standard common rail system because of the by-pass 
path with non-return valve. Varying energizing timing of both solenoid valves flexible 
pressure curves from ramp to rectangular can be generated. Pilot injections and late post 
injections are possible without activating the amplifier piston at the intermediate pressure in 
the rail. With this reduced pressure of the late post injection the risk of oil dilution can be 
minimized.  
 
To fulfill future exhaust gas limits especially with EGR high injection pressures (2000 bar and 
more) are required. An increase of the system pressure with a standard common rail system 
for heavy duty engines leads to high effort on rail and high pressure pump design, lower 
efficiency and durability. High pressure pump and rail of the development tool APCRS are 
designed for intermediate pressure level and higher capacity depending on the ratio of 
amplifier piston. To avoid mixing of engine oil with fuel the high pressure pump for APCRS 
is fuel lubricated. The APCRS is designed for multiple injection, rate shaping, high injection 
pressure and high hydraulic efficiency of the injection system to reduce emissions and fuel 
consumption. 
 
 
37 
 
3.3   Diesel Injection System Specification 
 
The specification for all diesel engines are restricted more and more regarding exhaust gas 
limits, fuel consumption, noise and costs and this with increasing demands ondriveability, 
lifetime, power output, service and diagnosis, Figure 5. Applying EGR or increased rated 
speed to a heavy duty diesel engine higher maximum injection pressures are essential.          
To achieve future more stringent exhaust gas limits additionally low sulphur diesel fuel is 
necessary. The flexible diesel fuelinjection system is assisting this development with the 
measures multiple injection, rate shaping of the main injection and an increased maximum 
injection pressure. Furthermore high efficiency of the injection system itself is important. 
New developments on actuators (new solenoid and piezo technique), nozzle design and ECU 
control strategies alsofor exhaust gas aftertreatment are key factors for future diesel engine 
technology. Mixing of oil with the fuel must be reduced for more stringent exhaust gas limits 
due to the influence of sulphur content in the lubrication oil on the overall soot emissions with 
a downstream oxidation catalyst. 
 
 
Figure 3-2 Key Factors for Diesel Fuel Injection System Development 
 
 
3.4   Requirement of Diesel Injection System  
 
The fuel should be introduced into the combustion chamber within a precisely period of the 
cycle. The rate of injection should be such that it results in the desired heat release pattern. 
The quantities of the fuel metered should vary to meet changing speed and load 
requirements.The injected fuel must be broken into very fine droplets, i.e., good atomization 
should be obtained. 
38 
 
The spray-pattern must be such that it results in rapid mixing of fuel and air The beginning 
and the end of injection should be sharp, i.e., there should not be any dribbling or after 
injection.  
 
The injection timing, if desired, should be change to suit the engine speed and load 
requirements. In the case multi cylinder engines, the distribution of the metered fuel among 
various cylinders should be uniform. In addition to the above requirements, the weight and the 
size of the fuel injection system must be minimum.  
 
 
3.5   Fuel Injection Pumps  
 
The pump’s function is to draw fuel from the fuel reservoir through a filter and deliver liquid 
fuel at high pressure via nozzle pipes to the following stage of injection. Figure 3-4 depicts a 
mechanical in-line diesel fuel injector pump. 
 
 
3.5.1   In-Line Injection Pumps 
 
This type of pump is typically found in the 40 to 100 kW per cylinder maximum power 
range of engine. It contains a plunger and barrel assembly for each engine cylinder. 
 
 
 
Figure 3-3 Typical Mechanical In-Line Diesel Fuel Injector Pump 
 
39 
 
Each plunger is raised by a cam on the pump camshaft (driven via gear or belt off the 
engine crankshaft) and is forced back by the plunger return spring. The plunger fits sufficiently 
accurately    within the barrel to seal without additional sealing elements, even at high pressures 
and low speeds. Varying the effective plunger stroke alters the amount of fuel delivered. 
This is achieved by means of a control rod or rack, which moves in the pump housing and 
rotates the plunger via a ring gear or linkage lever. The plunger chamber above the plunger is 
always connected with the chamber below the plunger helix by a vertical groove or bore in 
the plunger. Delivery ceases when the plunger helix exposes the intake port (port opening), 
thus connecting the plunger chamber with the suction gallery. When this takes place 
depends on the rotational position of the plunger. Figure 3-4 depicts the plunger movement 
during the metering of different quantities of diesel fuel. 
 
 
Figure 3-4  Helical Control of Fuel Delivery by Rotating Plunger 
 
In the case of a lower helix, delivery always starts (port closing) at the same time, but ends 
sooner or later depending on the rotational position of the plunger. With a plunger with an 
upper helix, port closing (start of delivery) not port opening is controlled by the helix and 
is varied by rotating the plunger. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
3.5.2   Distributor or Rotary-Type Fuel Injection Pumps 
 
A diesel fuel system comprising of a distributor-type fuel-injection pump with mechanical 
governor is shown in Figure 3-5. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3-5 Distributor-Type Diesel Fuel Pump 
 
Normally used in multi-cylinder engines with less than 30 kW per cylinder  maximum power 
with injection pressures up to 75 MPa. These pumps have  only one plunger and barrel. 
The pump plunger is made to describe a  combined rotary and stroke movement by the 
rotating cam plate. The fuel is accurately metered to each injection nozzle in turn by this 
plunger which simultaneously acts as the distributor. Such units are more compact and 
cheaper than in-line pumps but cannot achieve such high injection pressures. The distributor-
type fuel injection pump is combined with an automatic timing device,  governor,  and  supply  
pump  to  form  a  single  unit. 
 
41 
 
A large number of the latest generation passenger cars and light commercial  vehicles  are  
fitted  with  high-pressure  rotary  pumps  with electronically controlled metering valves. 
Their compactness and flexibility make them well suited to modern emission and performance 
requirements. 
 
 
3.5.3   Single-Barrel Injection Pumps 
 
Figure 3-6 shows a section view of a single-barrel fuel injection pump. The operation of the 
metering element of this type of injection pump has been discussed and is depicted in    
Figure 3-6. 
 
 
Figure 3-6 A Single-Barrel Injection Pump 
 
Single-barrel injection pumps are used on small single and twin cylinder diesel engines as 
well as large engines with outputs of more than 100 kW per cylinder. Such pumps are driven by 
an auxiliary cam on the engine camshaft. 
42 
 
3.5.4   Unit Fuel Injectors 
 
A fuel injector brings about the actual introduction of fuel into the combustion chamber of an 
engine. The cut-away view depicted in Figure 2-8 shows a unit fuel injector and its driving 
mechanism, as typically used in large diesel engines. 
 
 
 
Figure 3-7 A Cutaway View of a Cam Operated, Pintle Type Fuel Injector 
 
The injectors normally receive fuel from the pump via a fuel-distribution manifold of 
some type. This either comprises a set of separate fuel pipes from the injector pump to the 
individual injectors, or a single, high pressure fuel line (common rail) fed by the fuel pump, 
from which fuel is distributed to the injectors. Traditionally diesel injectors are actuated 
mechanically by means of camshaft lobes depressing a plunger. Depressing the plunger 
blocks off the metering orifice that supplies fuel to the injector. This prevents more fuel from  
entering the injector body, ensuring that only an exactly metered out quantity of fuel is 
available for injection each time. 
43 
 
Next the descending plunger compresses the fuel forcing it through check valves into the 
injector spray tip. The injector tip is the most critical part of the injection system. It consists of a 
body containing a spring-loaded needle valve blocking off single or multiple orifices. Once 
the fuel has been pressurised to a sufficient degree by the plunger it forces the needle off 
its seat against the spring and fuel can issue through one or multiple orifices, depending on 
combustion chamber design, into the combustion chamber. It is important to keep the volume 
of fuel left between the needle and nozzle orifices as small as possible to prevent any fuel 
flowing into the cylinder after injection is over, to control hydrocarbon emissions, (and 
possible engine damage). 
 
 
Figure 3-8 Electronically Controlled Unit Fuel Injector 
 
More recently the technology for electronic control of injectors has become available. 
Figure 3-8  depicts  the metering  components of a mechanical injector compared to those 
of an electronically controlled unit. Instead of using a camshaft lobe to actuate the injector 
plunger, a solenoid operated control valve performs the injection timing and fuel 
metering functions. Solenoid valve closure initiates pressurization and injection, and 
opening causes injection pressure decay and end of injection. Duration of valve closure 
determines the quantity of fuel injected. The unit, [shown in figure 3-8 above] still uses 
camshaft/rocker arm driven plungers to generate the injection pressure, and employs 
needle-valve nozzles of conventional design. Increased flexibility in fuel metering and timing 
and simpler injector mechanical designs are important advantages.  
 
44 
 
Naturally the evolution of diesel engines over the years has called for engines that are more 
powerful for their specific capacity while being more fuel efficient and forming less 
pollutants during the combustion process. All these factors have led to a steady rise in the 
injection pressures of modern engines. This development is taking place in order to facilitate 
reducing the droplet size of the ‘fuel mist’. The smaller the fuel droplets contained within 
the inlet charge are, the better the fuel will mix with the air within the combustion chamber 
and the more uniformly the combustion flame will propagate within the ‘squish’  volume  
above  the  piston  releasing  maximum  energy  in  a controlled manner. 
 
 
3.5.5   Common Rail Injection Systems 
 
Common rail direct fuel injection is a modern variant of direct fuel injection system for diesel 
engines. On diesel engines, it features a high-pressure (over 1,000 bar/15,000 psi) fuel rail 
feeding individual selenoid valves, as opposed to low-pressure pump feeding unit injectors 
(Pumpe/Düse or pump nozzles). Third-generation common rail diesels now feature 
piezoelectric injectors for increased precision, with fuel pressure up to 1,800 bar/26,000 psi. 
 
The common rail system prototype was developed in late 1960s by Robert Huber of 
Switzerland and the technology further developed by Dr. Marco Ganser at the Swiss Federal 
Institute of Technology in Zurich, later of Ganser-Hydromag AG (est.1995) in Oberageri. 
 
The first successful usage in production vehicle began in Japan by the mid-1990s. Dr. Shohei 
Itoh and Masahiko Miyaki of Denso Corporation, a japanese automotive parts manufacturer, 
developed the common rail fuel system for heavy duty vehicle and turned it into practical use 
on their ECD-U2 common rail system mounted on the Hino Rising Ranger truck and sold for 
general use in 1995. Denso claims the first commercial high presure common rail system in 
1995. 
 
Modern common rail systems, whilst working on the same principle, are governed by an 
engine control unit (ECU) which opens each injector electronically rather than mechanically. 
This was extensively prototyped in the 1990s with collaboration between Magneti Marelli, 
Centro Ricerche Fiat and Elasis. Afterresearch and development by the Fiat Group, the design 
was acquired by the german company Robert GmbH for completion of development and 
refinement for mass-production. In highsight, the sale appeared to be a tactical error for Fiat, 
as the new technology proved to be highly profitable.  
45 
 
The company had little choise but to sell, however, as it was in a poor financial state at the 
time and lacked the resources to complete development  on its own. In 1997 they extended its 
us efor passenger cars. The first passenger car that used the common rail system was the 1997 
model Alfa Romeo 156 2.4 JTD, and later on that same year Mercedes-Benz S220 CDI. 
 
 
 
Figure 3-9 Common Rail Fuel Injection System 
 
Common rail engines have been used in marine and locomotive applications for some time. 
The Cooper-Bessemer GN-8 (cica 1942) is an example of hydraulically operated common rail 
diesel engine, also known as a modified common rail. 
 
Vickers used common rail system in submarine engine circa 1916. Doxford Engine Ltd. 
(opposed-piston heavy marine engine) use a common rail system (from 1921 to 1980) 
whereby a multi-cylinder reciprocating fuel pump generated a pressure of approximately 600 
bar, with the fuel being stored in accumulator bottles. Pressure control was achieved by means 
of an adjustable pump discharge stroke and a “spill valve”. Camshaft-operated mechanical 
timing valves were used used to supply the spring-loaded Brice/CAV/Lucas injectors, which 
injected through the side of cylinder into the chamber formed between the pistons. Early 
engines had a pair of timing cams, one for ahead running an done for astern.  
46 
 
Later engines had two injectors per cylinder, and the final series of constant-pressure 
turbocharged engines were fitted with four injectors per cylinder. This system was used fort 
he injection of both diesel oil and heavy fuel oil (600cSt heated to a temperature of 
approximately 130 oC). 
 
Solenoid or piezoelectric valves make possible fine electronic control over the fuel injection 
time and quantity, and the higher pressure that the common rail technology makes available 
provides better fuel atomization. In order to lower engine noise, the engine’s electronic 
control unit can inject a small amount of diesel just before the main injection event (“pilot” 
injection), thus reducing its explosiveness and vibration, as well as optimizing injection 
timing and quantity for variations in fuel quality, cold starting and so on. Some advanced 
common rail fuel systems perform as many as five injectors per stroke. Common rail engines 
require very short (<10 second) or no heating-up time at all dependent on ambient 
temperature, and produce lower engine noise and emissions than older systems. 
 
Diesel engines have historically used various forms of fuel injection. Two common types 
include the unit injection system and the distributor/inline pump systems (See diesel engine 
and unit injector for more information). While these older systems provided accurate fuel 
quantity and injection timing control, they were limited by several factors: 
 
 They were cam driven, and injection pressure was proportional to engine speed. This 
typically meant that the highest injection pressure could only be achieved at the 
highest engine speed and hte maximum achievable injection pressure decreased as 
engine speeed decreased. This relationship is true with all pumps, even those used on 
common rail systems; with unit or distributor systems, however, the injection pressure 
is tied to the instantaneous pressure pf a single pumping event with no accumulator, 
and thus the relationship is more prominent and troublesome. 
 
 They were limited in the number and timing of injection events that could be 
commanded during a single combustion event. While multiple injection events are 
possible with these older systems, it is much more difficult and costly to achieve. 
 
 
 For the typical distributor/inline system, the start of injection occured at a pressure 
determined pressure (often referred to as: pop pressure) and ended at a pre-determined 
pressure. This characteristic resulted from “dummy” injectors in the cylinder head 
which opened and closed at pressures determined by the spring preload applied to the 
plunger in the injector. Once the pressure in the injector reached a pre-determined 
level, the plunger would lift and injection would start. 
47 
 
 
 
Figure 3-10 Piezo-Injector with Coaxial-Vario-Nozzle 
 
In common rail systems, a high-pressure pump stores a reservoir of fuel at high pressure-up to 
and above 2,000 bar (29,000 psi). The term “common rail” refers to the fact that all of the fuel 
injectors are supplied by a common fuel rail which is nothing more than a pressure 
accumulator where the fuel is stored at high pressure. This acumulator supplies multiple fuel 
injectors with high-pressure fuel. This simplifies the purpose of the high-pressure pump in 
that it only has to maintain a commanded pressure at a target (either mechanically or 
electronically controlled). The fuel injector are typically ECU-controlled. 
 
When the fuel injectors are electrically activated, a hydraulic valve (consisting of a nozzle and 
plunger) is mechanically or hydraulically opened and fuel is sprayed into the cylinders at the 
desired pressure. Since the fuel pressure energy is stored remotely and the injectors are 
electrically actuated, the injection pressure at the start and  end of injection is very near the 
pressure in the accumulator (rail), thus producing a square injection rate. If the accumulator, 
pump and plumbing are sized properly, the injection pressure and rate will be the sam efor 
each of the multiple injection events. 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
      
 
Figure 3-11 Heart of Common Rail Injection Systems 
 
 Advantages of the Common Rail Injection Systems 
 
 Improves the air fuel mixture formation 
 
 Injection pressure can be freely selected within wide limits 
 
 The beginning of the fuel injection quantity of fuel can be determibed accurately 
(100/6000 rpm in range 100 mm3/revolution) 
 
 Provides flexibility in terms of working conditions changed 
 
  Combustion is ecological and economical 
 
 
Disadvantages of the Common Rail Injection Systems  
 
Like all good things have a negative side, this engine also have few disadvantages. The key 
disadvantage of the CRDi engine is that it is costly than the conventional engine. The list also 
includes high degree of engine maintenance and costly spare parts. Also this technology can’t 
be employed to ordinary engines. 
49 
 
4.   Conclusion 
 
In this study, I have searched into different kind of fuel injection system which in both 
gasoline engine and diesel engine. The carburetor, D-Jetronic, K-Jetronic, L-Jetronic and 
motronic fuel injection were presented with their advantages and disadvantages. At today’s 
technology do not accept carburetor because this system is ineffective to supply efficiency run 
range in fuel consumption and low emission values. Jetronic systems have endeavored to 
catch to higher engine performance, lower emission values and lower fuel consumption with 
their additional systems to adjust better mixture. In addition to motronic system is the most 
advanced system with well injection and ignition system is combinated so getting more 
commonly to use passenger vehicles but the system prices are also getting high with complex 
structures and the fixing to all elements of system are not available. The service cost is 
modestly high. On the other hand, common rail is getting commonly due to high performance 
and emission effects. In today, motronic and common rail injection are getting more popular 
and useable.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
References 
 
1. Heywood J.B, Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, (2000). 
2. Hillier V.A.W and Rogers D. and Coombes P., Hillier’s Fundamentals of Motor Vehicle 
Technology, Cheltenham, (2006).  
3. Nunney M.J, Light and Heavy Vehicle Technology, Oxford, (2007). 
4. Megep, Benzinli Motorlar Yakıt ve Ateşleme Sistemleri, Ankara, (2006). 
5. Probst C.O, Bosch Fuel Injection and Engine Management, Cambridge, (2013). 
6. Challen B. and Baranescu R., Diesel Engine Reference Book, Oxford, (1999). 
7. Hacısevki H., Spark and Compression Ignition Engine, Eastern Mediterranean University, 
(2007). 
8. Internet, http://www.otobil.net/blog/genel/yakit-enjeksiyon-sistemleri, (visited date 2013).   
9. Internet, http://tr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karb%C3%BCrat%C3%B6r, (visited date 2013). 
10. Internet, http://www.obinet.gazi.edu.tr/obinet/yakit_sistemi/k_jetronik.htm (visited date 
2013). 
11. Işıksoluğu M.A, Benzin Motorlarında Yakıt Püskürtme Sistemleri, Istanbul, (2001). 
12. Karamangil, M.İ, Direkt Püskürtmeli Benzin Motorları ve Mitsubishi Metodu, Bursa, 
(2004). 
13. Demir A., Sıkıştırma ile Ateşlemeli Motorlar, Istanbul, (2010). 
14. Internet, http://www.autoshop101.com/forms/h20.pdf, (visited date 2013). 
15. Mahr B., Future and Potential of Diesel Injection Systems, Stuttgart, (2010). 
16. Internet, http://www.kfz-tech.de/Engl/LH-Jetronic.htm, (visited 2013). 
