          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1316 
 
DESIGN AND SPECIFICATION OF INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE     
Pritam Pain1, Deep Dewan2   
1Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, University of Engineering & Management, Kolkata, West Bengal, India 
2Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Kingston Polytechnic College, Barasat, West Bengal, India 
---------------------------------------------------------------------***----------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract - The aim of this report is to introduce the design 
and specification of Internal Combustion   Engine. Internal 
Combustion (I.C) Engine typically show a characteristic 
efficiency profile which varies with operating load and engine 
speed. In under low loading condition the operating efficiency 
is poor. For achievement of better overall efficiency by using of 
an energy storing and recovering process, involving 
compressing air. For improvement of Engine efficiency, we 
have used of heat transfer from the exhaust gases to the stored 
compressed air. 
Key Words:  Solidworks, IC Engine, 2 and 4 Stoke Engine, 
Piston and Cylinder. 
INTRODUCTION 
An internal combustion engine (ICE) is a heat engine. In an 
internal combustion engine, the prolongation of the high-
temperature and high-pressure gases produced by 
combustion applies direct force to some component of the 
engine. The force is applied typically to pistons, turbine 
blades, nozzle. This force moves the component over a 
distance, transforming chemical energy into useful 
mechanical energy. The term internal combustion engine 
usually refers to an engine in which combustion is 
intermittent, such as the more familiar four-stroke and two 
stroke piston engines, along with variants, such as the six-
stroke piston engine and the Wankel rotary engine. It also 
involves the thermodynamics relations that govern the 
processes of these engines, highlighting two main important 
cycles, which are: Otto cycle and Diesel cycles.  
 
Heat Engine: 
 
In thermodynamics, a heat engine is a system that converts 
the chemical energy of a fuel into mechanical energy, which 
can then be used to do mechanical work. It is classified into 
two types- 
(a) External combustion engine 
(b) Internal combustion engine 
External Combustion Engine: 
In this engine, the products of combustion of air and fuel 
transfer heat to a second fluid which is the working fluid of 
the cycle. 
 
Examples: 
1) Steam engines or steam turbine plant are an example of 
external combustion engine. The heat of combustion is 
employed to generate steam which is used in a piston engine 
(reciprocating type engine) or a turbine (rotary type engine) 
for useful work. 
2) Another example is the stirling engine although this has a 
only a niche role at present. Some gas turbines use an 
external cycle this could expand rapidly with the 
development of super critical carbon dioxide as the working 
fluid. 
Internal Combustion Engine: 
In this engine, which generates motive power by the burning 
of petrol, oil, or other fuel with air inside the engine, the hot 
gases produced being used to drive a piston or do other 
work as they expand. It can be classified into the following 
types: 
1. According to the basic engine design- (a) Reciprocating 
engine (Use of cylinder piston arrangement), (b) Rotary 
engine (Use of turbine). 
2. According to the type of fuel used- (a) Petrol engine, (b) 
diesel engine, (c) gas engine, (d) Alcohol engine. 
3. According to ignition of fuel- (a) Spark ignition engine, (b) 
hot spot ignition engine, (c) compression ignition engine. 
4. According to the number of strokes per cycle- (a) Two 
stroke engine, (b) Four stroke engine, (c) Six stroke engine. 
5. According to the number of cylinder- (a) Single cylinder 
and (b) multi-cylinder engine. 
6. Method of cooling- water cooled or air cooled. 
7. Type of cylinder arrangement- Vertical, horizontal, inline, 
radial, v-type, piston engines. 
8. Method governing- Hit and miss governed engines, 
quantitatively governed engines and qualitatively governed 
engine. 
 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1317 
 
Comparison Between External Combustion Engine And 
Internal Combustion Engine: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 1: Difference between EC & IC Engine 
Main Components Of Reciprocating IC Engine 
Name of the main components of IC engine are- piston, 
piston rings, cylinder, cylinder head, crank case, crankshaft, 
flywheel, connecting rod, spark plug etc. 
A. Cylinder: 
It is the main part of the engine inside which piston 
reciprocates to and fro. It should have high strength to 
withstand high pressure above 50 bar and temperature 
above 2000 0C. The ordinary engine is made of cast iron and 
heavy-duty engines are made of steel alloys or aluminum 
alloys. In the multi-cylinder engine, the cylinders are cast in 
one block known as cylinder block. 
B. Cylinder head:  
The top end of the cylinder is covered by cylinder head over 
which inlet and exhaust valve, spark plug or injectors are 
mounted. A copper or asbestos gasket is provided between 
the engine cylinder and cylinder head to make an air tight 
joint. 
C. Piston: 
Usually made of aluminum alloy which has good heat 
conducting property and greater strength at higher 
temperature. The main function of the piston is to transform 
the pressure generated by the burning air-fuel mixture into 
force, acting on the crankshaft. 
 
 
 
Fig – 2: Different parts of IC engine 
Design of piston is given below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 3: Design of piston 
D. Piston rings:  
These are housed in the circumferential grooves provided on 
the outer surface of the piston and made of steel alloys which 
retain elastic properties even at high temperature. 2 types of 
rings- compression and oil rings. Compression ring is upper 
ring of the piston which provides air tight seal to prevent 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1318 
 
leakage of the burnt gases into the lower portion. Oil ring is 
lower ring which provides effective seal to prevent leakage 
of the oil into the engine cylinder. 
E. Connecting rod:  
It converts reciprocating motion of the piston into circular 
motion of the crank shaft, in the working stroke. The smaller 
end of the connecting rod is connected with the piston by 
gudgeon pin and bigger end of the connecting rod is 
connected with the crank with crank pin. The special steel 
alloys or aluminum alloys are used for the manufacture of 
connecting rod. Design of connecting rod is given below. 
 
Fig – 4: Design of connecting rod 
F. Crankshaft:  
It converts the reciprocating motion of the piston into the 
rotary motion with the help of connecting rod. The special 
steel alloys are used for the manufacturing of the crankshaft. 
It consists of eccentric portion called crank. 
G. Crank case:  
It houses cylinder and crankshaft of the IC engine and also 
serves as sump for the lubricating oil. 
H. Flywheel:  
It is big wheel mounted on the crankshaft; whose function is 
to maintain its speed constant. It is done by storing excess 
energy during the power stroke, which is returned during 
another stroke. Design of flywheel is given below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 5: Design of flywheel 
 
Terminology Used In IC Engine: 
1. Cylinder bore (D): The nominal inner diameter of the 
working cylinder.  
2. Piston area (A): The area of circle of diameter equal to 
the cylinder bore.  
3. Stroke (L): The nominal distance through which a 
working piston moves between two successive reversals of 
its direction of motion.  
4. Dead centre: The position of the working piston and the 
moving parts which are mechanically connected to it at the 
moment when the direction of the piston motion is reversed 
(at either end point of the stroke).  
(a) Bottom dead centre (BDC): Dead centre when the 
piston is nearest to the crankshaft.  
(b) Top dead centre (TDC): Dead centre when the position 
is farthest from the crankshaft.  
5. Displacement volume or swept volume (Vs): The 
nominal volume generated by the working piston when 
travelling from the one dead centre to next one and given as, 
Vs=A × L 
6. Clearance volume (Vc): the nominal volume of the space 
on the combustion side of the piston at the top dead centre.  
7. Cylinder volume (V): Total volume of the cylinder.  
V= Vs + Vc 
8. Compression ratio (r): r = Vs / Vc 
Two Stroke Engine: 
-No piston stroke for suction and exhaust operations  
-Suction is accomplished by air compressed in crankcase or 
by a blower  
-Induction of compressed air removes the products of 
combustion through exhaust ports  
-Transfer port is there to supply the fresh charge into 
combustion chamber  
Fig – 6 represents operation of two stroke engine. 
 
 
 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 6: Cycle of operation in two stroke engine 
Four Stroke Engine: 
- Cycle of operation completed in four strokes of the piston 
or two revolution of the piston.  
(i) Suction stroke (suction valve open, exhaust valve closed)-
charge consisting of fresh air mixed with the fuel is drawn 
into the cylinder due to the vacuum pressure created by the 
movement of the piston from TDC to BDC.  
(ii) Compression stroke (both valves closed)-fresh charge is 
compressed into clearance volume by the return stroke of 
the piston and ignited by the spark for combustion. Hence 
pressure and temperature is increased due to the 
combustion of fuel.  
(iii) Expansion stroke (both valves closed)-high pressure of 
the burnt gases force the piston towards BDC and hence 
power is obtained at the crankshaft.  
(iv) Exhaust stroke (exhaust valve open, suction valve 
closed)- burned gases expel out due to the movement of 
piston from BDC to TDC.  
Fig – 7 show the cycle of operation of four stroke engine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 7:  Cycle of operation in four stroke engine 
 
Comparison Of Four-Stroke And Two-Stroke Engine: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 8: Difference between four-stroke and two-stroke 
engine 
CI And SI Engine: 
The diesel engine (also known as a compression-ignition or 
CI engine), named after Rudolf Diesel, is an internal 
combustion engine in which ignition of the fuel is caused by 
the elevated temperature of the air in the cylinder due to the 
mechanical compression (adiabatic compression). 
A spark-ignition engine (SI engine) is an internal 
combustion engine, generally a petrol engine, where the 
combustion process of the air-fuel mixture is ignited by a 
spark from a spark plug. 
Comparison of SI and CI engine: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 9: Difference between SI and CI engine 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1320 
 
Valve timing diagram: 
The exact moment at which the inlet and outlet valve opens 
and closes with reference to the position of the piston and 
crank shown diagrammatically is known as valve timing 
diagram. It is expressed in terms of degree crank angle. The 
theoretical valve timing diagram is shown in Fig – 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 10: Theoretical valve timing diagram 
But actual valve timing diagram is different from theoretical 
due to two factors-mechanical and dynamic factors. Fig – 7 
shows the actual valve timing diagram for four stroke low 
speed or high-speed engine. 
Opening and Closing Of Inlet Valve 
Inlet valve opens 12 to 30ᵒ CA before TDC to facilitate silent 
operation of the engine under high speed. It increases the 
volumetric efficiency.  
Inlet valve closes 10-60ᵒ CA after TDC due to inertia 
movement of fresh charge into cylinder i.e. ram effect.  
Fig – 11 represents the actual valve timing diagram for low 
and high-speed engine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 11: Actual valve timing diagram for low and high-
speed engine 
Opening and Closing Of Exhaust Valve 
Exhaust valve opens 25 to 55ᵒ CA before BDC to reduce the 
work required to expel out the burnt gases from the cylinder. 
At the end of expansion stroke, the pressure inside the 
chamber is high, hence work to expel out the gases increases.  
Exhaust valve closes 10 to 30ᵒ CA after TDC to avoid the 
compression of burnt gases in next cycle. Kinetic energy of 
the burnt gas can assist maximum exhausting of the gas. It 
also increases the volumetric efficiency. 
Valve Overlap 
During this time both the intake and exhaust valves are open. 
The intake valve is opened before the exhaust gases have 
completely left the cylinder, and their considerable velocity 
assists in drawing in the fresh charge. Engine designers aim 
to close the exhaust valve just as the fresh charge from the 
intake valve reaches it, to prevent either loss of fresh charge 
or unscavenged exhaust gas. 
Port timing diagram 
Drawn for 2-stroke engine  
No valve arrangement  
3 ports- inlet, transfer and exhaust  
Fig - 12 shows port timing diagram for 2-stroke engine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 12: Port timing diagram for 2-stroke engine 
Working cycle 
(a) Otto Cycle: - Thermodynamic cycle for SI/petrol engine.  
Reversible adiabatic compression and expansion process.  
Constant volume heat addition (combustion) and heat 
rejection process (exhaust).  
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1321 
 
Fig - 13 depicts the Otto cycle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 13: Otto cycle 
Heat supplied, qs=Cv(T3-T2)  
Heat rejection, qR=Cv(T4-T1)  
Compression ratio =rk=v1/v2 
Thermal efficiency, ɳth = (qs-qr)/qs = [Cv(T3-T2)-Cv(T4-
T1)]/Cv(T3-T2) = 1-[(T4-T1/(T3-T2)] 
In process 1-2, adiabatic compression process, 
T2/T1 = (V1/V2)γ-1 
=> T2 = T1.(rk)γ-1 
In adiabatic expansion process, i.e. 3-4, 
T4/T3 = (V3/V4)γ-1 
=> T3 = T4. (rk)γ-1 
ɳth = 1-T4-T1/[T4.(rk)γ-1-T1.(rk)γ-1] 
= 1-[1/(rk)γ-1 
Work done (W): 
Pressure ratio, rp = (P3/P2) = (P4/P1) 
P2/P1 = P3/P4 = ( V1/V2)γ = (rk)γ 
W = [(P3V3-P4V4)/(γ-1)]-[(P2V2-P1V1)/(γ-1)] 
1/(γ-1)[P4V4{(P3V3/P4V4)-1}-P1V1{(P2V2/P1V1)-1}] 
=1/(γ-1)[P4V1(rkγ-1-1)-P1V1(rkγ-1-1)] 
=P1V1/γ-1[rp(rkγ-1-1)-(rkγ-1-1)] 
=P1V1/γ-1[rkγ-1-1)(rp-1)] 
Mean effective pressure, Pm = work done/swept volume 
=work done-(V1-V2) 
Pm =[P1V1/γ-1{(rkγ-1-1)(rp-1)}]/V1-V2 
=[P1rk{rk-1-1)(rp-1)}]/( γ-1)(rk-1) 
(b) Diesel Cycle: - Thermodynamic cycle for low speed 
CI/diesel engine. 
-Reversible adiabatic compression and expansion process. 
-Constant pressure heat addition (combustion) and heat 
rejection process (exhaust). 
Fig – 14 depicts the diesel cycle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 14: Diesel Cycle 
Heat supplied, Q1 =Cp(T3-T2) 
Heat rejection, Q2 = Cv(T4-T1) 
Compression ratio, rk = v1/v2 
Cut off ratio, rc = v3/v2 
Thermal efficiency,  
ɳth = (Q1-Q2)/Q1 = [Cp(T3-T2)-CV(T4-T1)]/[Cp(T3-T2)] = 1-
[(1/γ){(T4-T1)/(T3-T2)}] 
In adiabatic compression process i.e. 1-2, 
T2/T1=(V1/V2) γ-1 
=> T2=T1.(rk) γ-1 
In process 2-3, pressure constant, then 
T3/T2=V3/V2=rc 
=> T3=T2.rc=T1.(rk) γ-1.rc 
In adiabatic expansion process i.e. 3-4, 
T4/T3=(V3/V4) γ-1=[(V3/V2)*(V2/V4) γ-1]=(rc) γ-1*1/  (rk)γ-1 
=> T4=T3.(rc) γ-1*1/(rk) γ-1=T1.(rk) γ-1.rc.(rc) γ-1*1/(rk) γ-1=T1.rc 
ɳth = 1-[(1/ γ).{(T4-T1)/(T3-T2)}]=1-[1/ γ.(rk) γ-1].[{(rc) γ-1}/rc-
1] 
Work done (W): 
W=P2(V3-V2)+(p3v3-p4v4)/γ-1-(p2v2-p1v1)/ γ-1 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1322 
 
=P2(rcV2-V2)+[(p2rcv2)-(p4rkv2)]/γ-1-[(p2v2)-(p1rkv2)]/ γ-1 
 
 
      since V4=V1  
=P2V2[{(rc-1)( γ-1)+(rc-rc. γ.rk- γ.rk)-(1-rk1- γ)}/ γ-1] 
=[P1V1.rk γ-1{γ(rc-1)-rk1- γ(rc γ-1)}]/γ-1 
Mean effective pressure, 
Pm= [[P1V1.rk γ-1{γ(rc-1)-rk1- γ(rc γ-1)}]/γ-1]/(V1-V2) 
=[P1rk γ{ γ(rc-1)-rk1- γ(rc γ-1)}]/( γ-1)(rk-1) 
Comparison of Otto and Diesel Cycle 
a) For constant maximum pressure and same heat input 
(ɳth)Diesel>(ɳth)Otto 
b) For same compression ratio and same heat input 
(ɳth)Otto>(ɳth)Diesel 
c) For same maximum pressure and temperature 
(ɳth)Diesel>(ɳth)Otto 
d) for same maximum pressure and output 
(ɳth)Diesel>(ɳth)Otto 
FUELS & FUEL INJECTION 
In IC engines, the chemical energy contained in the fuel is 
converted into mechanical power by burning (oxidizing) the 
fuel inside the combustion chamber of the engine.  
Fuels suitable for fast chemical reaction have to be used in IC 
engines, they are following types-  
(a) Hydrocarbons fuels derived from the crude petroleum by 
proper refining process such as thermal and catalytic 
cracking method, polymerisation, alkylation, isomerisation, 
reforming and blending.  
(b) Alternative fuels such as 
-Alcohols (methanol, ethanol)  
-Natural gas (methane)  
-LPG (propane, butane)  
-Hydrogen  
Carburetion 
The process of preparing a combustible fuel-air mixture 
outside engine cylinder in SI engine is known as carburetion.  
Important factors which affect the process of carburetion are 
given below;  
-Time available for the mixture preparation i.e. atomization, 
mixing and the vaporization.  
-Temperature of the incoming air. 
-Quality of the fuel supply. 
-Design of combustion chamber and induction system. 
 Mixture requirements for steady state operation 
Three main areas of steady state operation of automotive 
engine which require different air fuel ratio are discussed 
below, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 15: Automobile carburetor 
(a) Idling and low load 
-From no load to about 20% of rated power.  
-No load running mode is called idling condition.  
-Very low suction pressure give rise to back flow of exhaust 
gases and air leakage.  
-Increases the amount of residual gases and hence increase 
the dilution effects.  
-Rich mixture i.e. F/A ratio 0.08 or A/F ratio 12.5:1 provide 
smooth operation of the engine.  
(b) Normal power range or cruising range 
-From about 20% to 75% of rated power.  
-Dilution by residual gases as well as leakage decreases, 
hence fuel economy is important consideration in this case.  
-Maximum fuel economy occurs at A/F ratio of 17:1 to 
16.7:1.  
-Mixture ratios for best economy are very near to the 
mixture ratios for minimum emissions.  
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1323 
 
(c) Maximum power range 
-From about 75% to 100% of rated power.  
-Mixture requirements for the maximum power is a rich 
mixture, of A/F about 14:1 or F/A 0.07 -Rich mixture also 
prevents the overheating of exhaust valve at high load and 
inhibits detonation.  
-In multi-cylinder engine the A/F ratio are slightly lower.  
Mixture requirements for transient operation 
-Carburetor has to provide mixture for transient conditions 
under which speed, load, temperature, or pressure change 
rapidly.  
-Evaporation of fuel may be incomplete in the transient 
condition, quantity of fuel may be increasing and decreasing. 
(a) Starting and warm up requirements 
-Engine speed and temperature are low during the starting 
of the engine from cold.  
-During starting very rich mixture about 5 to 10 times the 
normal amount of petrol is sulpplied i.e. F/A ratio 0.3 to 0.7 
or A/F ratio 3:1 to 1.5:1.  
-Mixture ratio is progressively made leaner to avoid too rich 
evaporated fuel-air ratio during warm up condition.  
-Too high volatility may form vapour bubbles in the 
carburetor and fuel lines particularly when engine 
temperatures are high.  
-Too low volatility may cause the petrol to condense on the 
cylinder walls, diluting and removing the lubricating oil film. 
(b) Acceleration requirements 
- Acceleration refer to an increase in engine speed resulting 
from the opening of the throttle.  
-Acceleration pump is used to provide additional fuel.  
Simple Carburetor 
-Provide air-fuel mixture for all operating conditions.  
-Carburetor depression is pressure differential in the float 
chamber and venture throat which causes discharge of fuel 
into the air stream.  
-Flow is controlled by small hole of fuel passage.  
-Pressure at the throat at the fully open throttle condition 
lies between 4 and 5 cm of Hg and seldom exceeds 8 cm Hg.  
-Petrol engine is quantity governed.  
-Drawback of simple carburetor is that it provides too rich 
and too lean mixture due to vacuum created at the throat is 
too high and too small which is undesirable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 16: Diagram of simple carburetor 
Complete Carburetor 
Additional systems used with simple carburetor can help the 
engine to operate at all conditions, which are given below,  
(i) Main metering system 
-Provide constant fuel-air ratio at wide range of speeds and 
loads.  
-Mainly based upon the best economy at full throttle (A/F 
ratio about 15.6:1).  
The different metering systems are,  
Compensating jet device 
-Addition to the main jet, a compensating jet is provided to 
provide the leanness effect.  
Emulsion tube or air bleeding device 
-Mixture correction is done by air bleeding alone.  
-In this arrangement main metering jet is fitted about 25 mm 
below the petrol level which is called as submerged jet.  
Back suction control or pressure reduction method 
-In this arrangement large vent line connects the carburetor 
entrance with the top of the float chamber and another small 
orifice line is connected with the top of the float chambers 
with venture throat.  
-It creates pressure differences according to engine 
operating conditions.  
 
 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1324 
 
Auxiliary valve carburetor 
-Valve spring of auxiliary valve lift the valve during increase 
of engine load which increases the vacuum at venture.  
-Allows more admittance more additional air and the 
mixture is not over rich.  
Auxiliary port carburetor 
-Opening of butterfly allows more air inductance which 
decreases quantity of fuel drawn.  
-Used in aircraft carburetors.  
(ii) Idling system 
-Idling jet is added for the idling and low load operation 
which requires rich mixture sof about A/F ratio 12:1.  
-Consists of small fuel line from the float chamber to a point 
of throttle side.  
-Gradual opening of throttle may stop the idling jet. 
 (iii) Power enrichment or economizer system 
-This system provides the richer mixture for maximum 
power range of operation.  
-It has meter rod economizer of large orifice opening to the 
main jet as the throttle is opened beyond a certain point. 
-Rod is tapered or stepped. 
 (iv) Acceleration pump system 
-Engine acceleration condition or rapid increase in engine 
speed may open the throttle rapidly which will not able to 
provide rich mixture.  
-Acceleration pump of spring-loaded plunger is used for fuel 
supply. 
(v) Choke 
-Rich mixture is required during cold starting period, at low 
cranking speed and before the engine warmed up condition.  
-Butterfly type valve or choke is used between the entrance 
to the carburetor and venture throat to meet the 
requirement.  
-Spring loaded by-pass choke is used in higher speeds.  
Carburetor types 
(i) Open choke: Zenith, solex and carter.  
Constant vacuum type: S.U. carburetor.  
(ii) Updraught type.  
Horizontal or downdraught: Mixture is assisted by gravity in 
its passage to the engine induction. 
 (a) Solex Carburetor 
-Provide ease of starting, good performance, and reliability.  
-Used in Fiat and standard cars and Willey jeep.  
-Bi-starter is used for cold starting.  
-Well of emulsion system is used for idling and slow running 
condition.  
-Diaphragm type acceleration pump is used for increasing 
speed case. 
 (b) Carter Carburetor 
-Downdraft type carburetor used in jeep.  
-Has triple venture diffusing type choke in which smallest 
lies above the level float chamber, other two below the 
petrol level, one below other.  
-Multiple venturies result in better formation of the mixture 
at very low speeds causing steady and smooth operation at 
very low and high engine speed.  
-Mechanical metering method is used.  
-Choke valve is provided in the air circuit for cold starting.  
-Plunger type acceleration pump is used. 
 (c) S.U. Carburetor 
-Constant air-fuel ratio is maintained due to vacuum 
depression.  
-Has only one jet.  
-No separate idling jet or acceleration pump.  
-Constant high velocity air across the jet may avoid the use of 
idling jet.  
-Jet lever arrangement provides the rich mixture in cold 
starting.  
-Used in many British cars and Hindustan ambassador car.  
Drawbacks of modern carburetor 
-Improper mixture proportion in multi-cylinder engine.  
-Loss of volumetric efficiency due to obstruction of flow of 
mixture from choke tubes, jets, throttle valve etc.  
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1325 
 
-Wear of carburetor parts.  
-Freezing at low temperature.  
-Surging when carburetor is tilted or during acrobatics in 
aircraft.  
-Backfiring in fuel pipe line. 
Petrol injection 
-To avoid above problem of modern carburetor, petrol 
injection is used like in diesel engine.  
-Petrol injected during the suction stroke in the intake 
manifold at low pressure.  
-Injection timing is not much critical as like in diesel engine.  
-Continuous injection and timed injection methods are used.  
Continuous injection 
-Fuel is sprayed at low pressure continuously into the air 
supply.  
-Amount of fuel is governed by air throttle opening.  
-In supercharged engine, fuel injected in the form of multiple 
spray into the suction side of the centrifugal compressor.  
-Provide efficient atomization of fuel and uniform mixture 
strength to all cylinder.  
-Higher volumetric efficiency.  
-One fuel injection pump and one injector. 
 Timed injection system 
-Similar to high speed diesel engine.  
-Components are fuel feed or lift pump, fuel pump and 
distributor unit, fuel injection nozzles and mixture controls.  
-Mixture controls are automatic for all engine operating 
conditions. 
 (i) Multiple plunger jerk pump system 
-Pump with separate plunger and high injection nozzle 
pressure for each cylinder.  
-100 to 300 bar pressure.  
-Measured quantity of fuel for definite time and over definite 
period is delivered. 
  
 
(ii) Low pressure single pump and distributor system 
-Single plunger or gear pump supply fuel at low pressure to a 
rotating distributor.  
-Pressure about 3.5 to 7 bar.  
(a) Lucas petrol injection system 
-Firstly, used in racing car.  
-Single distributor system with novel metering device.  
-Line pressure is maintained at 7 bar.  
-Metering distributor and control unit distributes the 
required amount of fuel at correct time and interval.  
-Has shuttle arrangements for metering unit.  
-In aircraft engine two injectors and spark plug provided for 
direct injection of fuel in combustion chamber. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 17: Diagram of Lucas petrol injection 
(b) Electronic fuel injection 
Fuel delivery system:  
-Electrically driven fuel pump draws fuel from tanks to 
distribute.  
-Fuel and manifold pressure kept constant by pressure 
regulator.  
Air induction system:  
-Air flow meter generates voltage signal according to air 
flow.  
-Cold start magnetic injection valve give good fuel 
atomization and also provide extra fuel during warm up 
condition. 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1326 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig – 18: Diagram of EFI 
  Electronic control unit (ECU):  
-Sensors for manifold pressure, engine speed and 
temperature at intake manifold.  
-Sensor measures operating data from locations and 
transmitted electrically to ECU.  
Injection timing:  
-Injected twice for every revolution of crank shaft.  
-Triggering of injectors. 
 Diesel injection system 
Requirements of diesel injection system 
-Fuel must introduce precisely defined period of cycle.  
-Amounts metered very accurately.  
-Rate of injection meet desired heat release pattern.  
-Quantities of fuel meet changing speed and load condition.  
-Good atomization of fuel.  
-Good spray pattern for rapid mixing of fuel and air.  
-No dribbling and after injection of fuel i.e. sharp injection.  
-Injection timing suits the speed and load requirements.  
-Distribution of fuel in multi-cylinder should uniform.  
-Weight, size and cost of fuel injection system should be less. 
 Types of diesel injection system 
(a) Air injection system 
-Fuel supplied through camshaft driven fuel pump.  
-Fuel valve is also connected with high pressure airline to 
inject into cylinder.  
-Multi-stage compressor which supply air at a pressure of 
about 60 to 70 bar. 
 
Fig- 19: Diagram of Air Injection System 
-Blast air sweeps the fuel along with it.  
-Good atomization results in good mixture formation and 
hence high mean effective pressure.  
-Heavy and viscous fuels are used  
-Fuel pump require small pressure.  
-But it is complicated due to compressor arrangement and 
expensive.  
-Bulky engine and low bhp.  
-Overheating and burning of valve seat.  
(b) Solid injection system 
-Fuel directly injected to combustion chamber without 
primary atomization termed as solid injection.  
-Also known as airless mechanical injection.  
-2 units-pressurize and atomizing unit.  
3 different types which are described below,  
(i) Individual pump and injector or jerk pump system: 
-Separate metering and compression pump are used for each 
cylinder.  
-Reciprocating fuel pump is used to meter and set the 
injection pressure of the fuel.  
-Heavy gear arrangements which gives jerking noise; hence 
name is given is jerk pump.  
-Jerk pump is used for medium and high-speed diesel 
engines. 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1327 
 
 
Fig – 20: Injector System 
(ii) Common rail system 
-High pressure fuel pump delivers fuel to an accumulator 
whose pressure is constant.  
-Plunger type of pump is used.  
-Driving mechanism is not stressed with high pressure hence 
noise is reduced.  
-Common rail or pipe is connected in between accumulator 
and distributing elements.  
-Separate metering and timing elements connected to 
automatic injector.  
-Self-governing type. 
 
Fig – 21: Common rail system 
(iii) Distributor system 
-Fuel pump pressurizes, meters and times the fuel supply to 
rotating distributor.  
-Number of injection strokes per cycle for the pump equals 
to the number of cylinders.  
-One metering element which ensure uniform distribution. 
 
Fig – 22: Diagram of distributor system 
Fuel Injectors 
3 main types of fuel injectors,  
Blast injector 
-These are superseded by mechanically operated injectors 
used in air injection system. 
Mechanically operated injector 
-Consist of a set of camshaft, cams and rocker gear and other 
cams for controlling the timing of the fuel injection.  
Automatic injector 
-Consists of spring-loaded needle valve and operated 
hydraulically by the pressure of fuel.  
-Quantity of fuel is metered by the fuel pump. 
 Types of nozzles 
(a) Depends on the type of combustion chamber, 
Open combustion chamber 
-Fuel seeks air.  
-Air swirl is created due to inclined induction port.  
-Multi-hole nozzle injects fuel at a pressure of about 200 to 
300 bar to slow moving air.  
-Provide good cold starting performance and improved 
thermal efficiency. 
 Pre-combustion chamber 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1328 
 
-Air velocity is very much high.  
-Single hole nozzle with 65 to 100 bar injection pressure is 
used.  
-Used in high speed engine due to rapid combustion.  
-External heating device for easy starting of the engine. 
 (b) Open and closed type of nozzle 
Open type  
-Consists of fuel orifices and open to burner.  
-Cheap and less efficient.  
Ex- opposed piston two-stroke Junkers diesel engine  
Closed type: pressure drop is minimized compared to open 
type.  
(c) Different types of nozzle for different combustion 
chamber 
(i) Single hole nozzle 
-Used in open combustion chamber.  
-Size of hole larger than 0.2 mm.  
-Very high injection pressure required.  
(ii) Multi-hole nozzle 
-No. of hole varies from 4 to 18 and the size from 1.5 to 0.35 
mm.  
-Injection rate is not uniform.  
(iii) Pintle nozzle 
-A projection or pintle is provided in the nozzle to avoid 
weak injection and dribbling.  
-Pintle may be cylindrical or conical shape.  
-Cone angle varied from 0 to 60ᵒ.  
-Provide good atomization and reduced penetration.  
-Fuel pressures are lower than single and multi-hole nozzle. 
 (iv) Pintaux Nozzle 
-Injected fuel in upstream of air.  
-Development of pintle nozzle with auxiliary hole drilled in 
the nozzle body.  
-Reduced delay period and increased thermal efficiency. 
Assembly view of a V8 Engine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)       e-ISSN: 2395-0056 
                Volume: 06 Issue: 09 | Sep 2019                   www.irjet.net                                                                    p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2019, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7.34       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 1329 
 
The complete overview V8 Engine is given above. 
CONCLUSION: 
Internal Combustion engines are among the most important 
engineering applications. The theory of applications either 
depends on Diesel or Otto cycles. They are categorized either 
according to the operating cycle, or due to the mechanism of 
working. Each type of engines has some advantages over the 
other one. Thus, the selection of the appropriate engine 
requires determining the conditions of applications.  
REFERENCE: 
1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hna4V7-FJ08 
2. “INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE” by V Ganesan. 
3. http://www.howstuffworks.com/two-strokes.htm 
4.http://www.uq.edu.au/~e4nsdja/teaching/e4213/Related
/Cycles/Diesel.htm 
5.http://www.uq.edu.au/~e4nsdja/teaching/e4213/Related
/Cycles/Otto.htm 
6. www.vssutac.in 
 
