Science and Technology 2012, 2(1): 47-50 
DOI: 10.5923/j.scit.20120201.09 
 
Lean Combustion Technology for Internal Combustion 
Engines: a Review 
Danaiah P.*, Ravi Kumar P,Vinay Kumar D. 
National Institute of Technology, Warangal, India 
 
Abstract  Lean burn is an effective way to improve spark ignition engine fuel economy. Lean combustion is generally 
considered as a timely solution to the more stringent environmental regulations and global weather concerns in the new era. 
However, the instability associated with the lean flame significantly keeps the lean combustion technique from being widely 
accepted as a major combustion technique for general applications. A comprehensive study has been made in this report on 
the investigations of various researchers and research organizations on the lean combustion technology as well as to give a 
review of the work which has recently been performed in the area of lean combustion. 
Keywords  Lean Burn, Engine Fuel Economy, Spark Ignition 
 
1. Introduction 
Before 1970’s a very few attempts were made to study on 
the lean combustion technology in SI engines with experi-
mentally. This technology was studied first during 1908 to 
demonstrate the advantages of higher thermal efficiency   
[1, 2].Later on the need for emission control became evident 
and hence the lean combustion technology shows to offer the 
lower emissions and also improves the fuel economy[2-4]. 
As a matter of fact the lean combustion engines have long 
been established to improve the fuel economy and lower 
emissions. However the raising of prices, uncertainties in the 
supply of petroleum products have forced to focus attention 
on the problems of lean mixture combustion in SI engines. 
2. Lean Limit through Increased 
Turbulence Generation 
Semenov’s (1963)[5] explained that the turbulent gas flow 
in piston engines is regarded as fundamental. Hotwire 
anemometry (HWA) studies in a motored engine with a flat 
top piston showed that shear flow through the intake valve 
was the primary source of turbulence generation. In most 
cases, however, much of the turbulence generated during the 
intake stroke decays before the combustion process is started. 
Squish-generated turbulence, on the other hand, is generated 
during the last phase of the compression stroke, just before it 
is most needed to influence the combustion process. 
 
* Corresponding author: 
danaiahpuli@gmail.com. (Danaiah P) 
Published online at http://journal.sapub.org/scit 
Copyright © 2012 Scientific & Academic Publishing. All Rights Reserved 
Heywood (1988)[6] has shown that turbulence generation 
by combustion chamber design, with an emphasis on squish, 
should provide a fast-burn rate for high efficiency and good 
emission control. He also noted that the chambers should be 
geometrically simple, and practical to manufacture. 
3. Comparison of Squish and Swirl 
Effects 
Goetz et al. (1993)[7] performed the experiments for de-
signing and comparing the effectiveness of the UBC 
squish-jet design in comparison to a high swirl design during 
lean operation by using a single-cylinder version of the 
Cummins L-10 engine are shown in Figures 1 and 2 
 
Figure 1.  Variation of Efficiency verses λ 
48 
 Danaiah P. et al.:  Lean Combustion Technology for Internal Combustion Engines: A Review 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Variation of NOx versus efficiency trade- off 
4. Partial Stratified Engine 
Evans et al. (1996)[8] modified spark plug used to im-
plement the PSC system as shown in Figure 3. In this, pas-
sage was drilled in the metal cladding of the spark plug to 
accommodate a small section of capillary tubing used to 
introduce the pilot fuel. The capillary tube connects to a fine 
slot in the threads, and ultimately the PSC fuel is delivered 
through a very small hole into the space around the ground 
electrode of the plug. The PSC system uses a high-pressure 
natural gas line (200 bar), which is regulated to lower pres-
sures (around 20–50 bar) to supply the spark-plug injector 
mounted in the research engine. 
 
Figure 3.  The PSC spark-plug-injector and system schematic 
Reynolds and Evans (2004)[9] investigated the PSC 
concept engine conducted two sets of experiments with a 
Ricardo Hydra single-cylinder engine[10] one at 2500 rpm, 
and one at 2000 rpm.The initial test data at 2500 rpm was 
primarily used to find optimum values for the timing of the 
pilot fuel injection with respect to the spark timing Figure 
4shows a plot of BSFC versus λ. It can be seen that there was 
little change in BSFC for l values less than about 1.6 for all 
pilot fuel injection timing values. An improvement is only 
evident when the mixture is so lean (l > 1.5) that the spark is 
insufficient to initiate reliable combustion without PSC fuel 
addition. The NOx emissions as a function of l are shown in 
Figure 5 for both homogeneous charge operation and for 
operation with the PSC system. 
 
Figure 4.  BSFC versus relative air fuel ratio λ, 2500 rpm 
 
Figure 5.  NOx versus relative air fuel ratio λ, at 2500 rpm 
5. Toyota Lean Burn Engine 
Noguchi et al[11] have developed the Toyota lean burn 
engine in the year 1976 which is provided with a 
pre-chamber where the fresh air-fuel mixture flows through 
an orifice during the compression stroke resulting in strong 
eddies of mixture with in the pre-chamber. A spark plug 
located at the orifice ignites a flame kernel in the mixture 
flow and causes the rapid combustion in the pre-chamber. As 
a result, the jet of flame shoots out into the main chamber 
where it ignites the lean mixture. This pre-chamber is called 
the turbulence generating pot (TGP). In addition to this, the 
carburettor and exhaust manifold are modified for a lean 
operation. The compression ratio used was 8.5 and 9 with the 
volume of TGP being 4.6cc to 10.4cc, forming 2.2% to 4.9 % 
of the total combustion volume. The diameter of the con-
necting orifice is 8.5mm to17mm. 
6. Fireball Combustion Chamber 
Engine 
Michal G May[12] has developed the fireball combustion 
chamber engine which consists of a compact combustion and 
 
 Science and Technology. 2012; 2(1): 47-50 
49 
 
 
 
has claimed successful operation with homogeneous mixture 
of air fuel ratio around 26:1. In this engine, the exhaust valve 
is recessed into a combustion chamber which is in the shape 
of small bath tub. The remaining surface, including that of 
the inlet valve, is flat and virtually flush with the cylinder 
head faces and functions as a wide squish area. This ge-
ometry induces a high swirl at about 10 to 20 degrees btdc. A 
looping flow pattern results and rotating charge is concen-
trated in the open recess, where it is ignited by a spark plug 
located in one corner and burns very rapidly. This configu-
ration allows the use of a high compression ratio without the 
risk of pre-ignition and knocking. A high thermal efficiency 
and more complete combustion are thus achieved. Both fuel 
consumption and emissions are reduced. 
7. Lean Burn Pre-Chamber Engine 
Walfer Brand Stetter[13] developed a simpler, but very 
effective concept, that of a lean burn pre-chamber (PC) en-
gine in order to meet the future emissions and fuel economy 
standards for European countries. A large part of his ex-
perimental work dealt with fuel-air mixture formation, dis-
tribution and heating. A simple means of exhaust gas after 
treatment was also considered in this concept.  He compared 
this newly developed engine with his own earlier version of 
pre-chamber injection (PCI) stratified charge engine with a 
divided combustion chamber and fuel injection into the 
pre-chamber. He has claimed a significant improvement in 
mixture distribution between cylinders eve during cold op-
eration. The emissions were reduced by approximately 30% 
with a simple thermal reactor. With the PC concept exhaust 
emissions of 25 g of CO per test and 9 g of HC and NO per 
test and a fuel consumption of 11.9,1 per 100 km run could 
be obtained when the European driving style was followed. 
8. Pre-Chamber Torch Ignition 
T.G. Adam[14] has developed an engine which has a 
combustion chamber of a simple design called the pre- 
chamber torch ignition. It is claimed that the average CO 
content in the exhaust gas can be reduced to less than 0.5%. 
Some simple calculations to find optimum torch volume and 
the orifice diameter have also been developed for this engine. 
The experimental results have shown significant reduction 
HC and NOᵪ produced in the combustion process could be 
reduced by the use of torch nozzle to control the burning rate, 
which I turn would affect the peak temperature ad its dura-
tion and hence the NOᵪ formation. 
9. Tornado Chamber 
Herbsleb et al[15] of Demark investigated the lean com-
bustion of a homogeneous air fuel mixture in a special type 
of combustion chamber called, Tornado chamber and could 
get a lean operation of about 24:1and an improvement in 
specific fuel consumption (SFC) of about 5% compared to 
that of the Heron type combustion chamber. In this engine, 
the combustion chamber is located on the top of the piston.  
In order to produce a high swirl near TDC and achieve faster 
combustion two pockets with a connecting channel were 
formed. 
10. High Compression Ratio Compact 
Chambers 
The use of a high compression ratio compact combustion 
chamber was investigated by Thring and Overington[16], 
with an objective of improving fuel economy with in a given 
set of exhaust emission constraints. The effects of the pa-
rameters such as swirl, compression ratio, combustion 
chamber geometry and its location were investigated. It was 
found that varying the rate of swirl of the charge would have 
a significant effect on the octane requirement, fuel economy 
and exhaust emissions. The optimum swirl ratio was found to 
be 0.3. It made very little difference with the location of the 
chamber in the cylinder head or in the piston, except that 
HRCCC in the piston was not so good with fuels of low 
Research octane Numbers (RON). A 6% improvement in 
fuel economy was claimed when the HRCCC concept was 
used in a four cylinder engine. The best compression ratios 
were about 13:1 for Europe and about 11:1for the USA and 
Japan. 
11. Swirl Produced By Intake Port 
Richard Belaire et al[17] in their work, using a cylinder 
head with a swirl producing, intake port (75% and 60% 
squish bowl in the piston chambers and a disk chamber) 
experimental measurements of burn rates were carried out in 
a single cylinder, homogeneous charge engine. Three dif-
ferent combustion chambers were investigated. The data was 
obtained with each combustion chamber under variation of 
spark timing, exhaust gas recirculation and load at 1500 rpm. 
It was concluded that the combustion rate was strongly in-
fluenced by the chamber shape. The 10-90%burn duration of 
the 75% and 60% squish chambers were respectively about 
40% and 60% that of the disc chamber. Chamber configura-
tion had less effect on 0-10%burn time than the bowl in the 
piston chambers. 
12. High Compression Lean Burn 
Engine 
Sutton[18] carried out experimental investigations on 
three types of combustion chambers. The combustion 
chamber was provided below the exhaust valve and below 
the inlet valve in two different engines. The performance of 
these chambers was compared with the standard combustion 
chamber. Test results have shown that the best performance 
50 
 Danaiah P. et al.:  Lean Combustion Technology for Internal Combustion Engines: A Review 
 
 
 
was obtained with the high compression lean burn engine 
(HCLBE) design with the main combustion space under the 
inlet valve, arranged to promote a high degree of induction 
swirl. Faster burning of the combustion charge gave sig-
nificantly improved knock free performance and increased 
the engine efficiency. 
13. Lean-Burn Engine - Potential 
Analysis 
Analysis of the thermodynamic cycle of IC engine[19] 
from the point of view of economy and emissions was car-
ried out. From this analysis potential capability of engine 
development was derived. This potential capability is lean 
burn engine, fuelled with homogeneous mixture with λ ≥ 1.4. 
Several different modes of fuelling were proposed and tested 
on one-cylinder test engine from the point of view of ex-
tending lean operating limit of the engine, emissions and fuel 
economy. Among them were: fuelling with evaporated pre-
heated gasoline, with gas (LPG evaporated) and with liquid 
butane. From these modes, fuelling with liquid butane in-
jected to inlet port was selected and finally tested. 
14. Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper several techniques on lean combustion 
technology have been studied and Future work includes 
validation of suitability of the techniques for operation under 
the different compression ratios with the influence of igni-
tion energy and by using different alternative fuels. 
Abbreviations 
1) HWA: Hotwire anemometry 
2) PSC: partially stratified-charge 
3) BSFC: Brake specific fuel consumption 
4) PC: pre-chamber 
5) PCI: pre-chamber injection 
6) SFC: Specific fuel consumption 
7) RON: Research octane Numbers 
8) HCRCC: High Compression Ratio CompactChambers 
9) HCLBE: high compression lean burn engine 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Hopkinson B,” the effect of mixture strength and scavenging 
on thermal efficiency”,Proc.Inst.Mech.Engr.,417,1908 
[2] 
Jakson MW “The influence of air-fuel ratio,sparktiming,and 
combustion chamber deposits on exhaust hydrocarbon emis-
sions”, SAE technical progress series,Vehicle emission Vol 6 
PP 175-194 ,1964 
[3] 
TanumaT ,Saski K , Kaneko,T and Kawasaki, H ,” Igni-
tion,combustion ,and exhaust emissions of lean mixtures in 
automotive spark ignition engines”,SAE paper 710159,1971 
[4] 
Ricardo,H.R “ report of the empire motor fuel commit-
tee”,Procinst.autoengg .Part 1 1923-24 
[5] 
Semenov, E.S. (1963). Studies of turbulent gas flow in piston 
engines. NASA Tech. Trans. F97 
[6] 
Heywood, J.B. (1988). Internal Combustion Engine Funda-
mentals.McGraw-hill, New York. 
[7] 
Goetz, W., Evans, R.L., and Duggal, V. (1993). Fast-burn 
combustion chamber development for natural gas engines. 
Proceedings of the Windsor Workshop on Alternative Fuels, 
pp. 577 601 
[8] 
Evans, R.L., Blaszczyk, J., Gambino, M., Iannaccone, S., and 
Unich, A. (1996). High efficiency natural-gas engines. Con-
ference on Energy and the Environment, Capri, Italy 
[9] 
Reynolds, C. and Evans, R.L. (2004). Improving emissions 
and performance characteristics of lean burn natural gas en-
gines through partial-stratification.Int. J. Engine Res. 5(1), 
105 114 
[10] Blaszczyk, J. (1990). UBC Ricardo Hydra Engine Test Fa-
cility, UBC Alternative Fuels Laboratory Report AFL-90-15. 
[11] NuguchiM,Sanda S and Nakmur N ,” Development of Toyota 
lean burn engine”SAEpaper 760757 1976 
[12] Michael, G. May., “Lower specific fuel consumption with 
high compression lean bur spark ignited 4-stroke engine”, 
SAE paper No.790386 
[13] [13] Walter Bradsetter,” the Volkswagen lean bur PC-Engine 
concept” SAE paper No.800456, 1980. J 
[14] [14] Adams, T.G., “Theory and Evaluation of auxiliary 
combustion (Torch) chamber”, SAE paper 780631 
[15] Herbsleb, K.S., Lorsenzen, L. and Kofoed, E., “ Lean com-
bustion in a high compression four stroke gasoline engine”, 
SAE paper No.810786,1981. 
[16] Thring, R.H., Overlington, M.T., “Gasoline Engine Combus-
tion-The High Ratio Compact Chamber”, SAE paper No. 
820166 
[17] Richard, C. Belaire, George C. Davis, Kent J.C. and Rodway, 
J., Tabaezynski, “combustion chamber o burn rates a high 
swirl spark ignition engine”, SAE paper No.830335. 
[18] Sutton,D.L., "combustion chamber design for improved 
performance and economy with high compression lean burn 
operation”, SAE paper 830336 
[19] A. Kowalewicz “lean-burn engine-potential analysis” Inter-
national Journal of Automotive Technology, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 
147-155 (2001) 
 
