IJSRD - International Journal for Scientific Research & Development| Vol. 1, Issue 10, 2013 | ISSN (online): 2321-0613 
 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
2182 
Abstract—As growing capacity of the computational 
techniques, 
multi-dimensional 
Computational 
Fluid 
Dynamics (CFD) has found more and more applications in 
diesel engine research, design and development. It is proved 
by the practice that the reliability of using multi-dimensional 
CFD tools to assist in IC engine research, design and 
development. By using CFD tools optimally it is easy to 
forecast and analyses various details that are technically 
difficult like in cylinder process of fuel combustion, 
temperature & pressure contours, emission etc. prior to 
experimental tests to reduce the number of investigated 
parameters 
as 
well 
as 
time 
and 
thus 
costs. 
A 
multidimensional model was created and analysis of 
combustion was done using FLUENT, ANSYS 14.5 
packages and the 2D geometry was modeled and meshed 
using GAMBIT 2.4.6.  
Keywords- CFD, CO2 emission, Combustion modeling, fuel 
combustion, k-ε model  
I. INTRODUCTION 
Reduced fuel consumption and improved efficiency are 
always the primary area of consideration in internal 
combustion engine design sector. They were generally done 
by building prototypes and testing them. But this traditional 
process always had several limitations. They were time 
consuming, cost consuming and also a prototype made for a 
single purpose didn't had the complete versatility of using 
the same for other purpose. This difficulty can be overcome 
by using CFD studies [1]. With the increasing advancement 
in computational power of modern computers, CFD has 
found its application in diesel combustion. This is now 
widely used by many automobile industries not only for 
design and analysis of engine but also for the whole vehicle 
analysis. Of the many types of models for engine 
combustion process, multidimensional computational fluid 
dynamics (CFD) models is gaining momentum due to its 
capability to predict the gas flow patterns, fuel spray 
structure etc [2]. 
II. COMPUTATIONAL PROCEDURE 
The combustion simulation of compression ignition engine 
was developed using fluent software (ANSYS 14.5 package) 
and the various equations of the multi-dimensional model 
were solved by the software automatically. The main inputs 
include engine speed, injection details, bore, stroke, 
connecting rod length, initial pressure and temperature. The 
program concerning the simulation model predicts the 
cylinder pressure, cylinder temperature, heat release rate, 
emission etc. The results including graphs and various 
contours (temperature, pressure etc.) were generated by 
fluent software as outputs to the program for given inputs. 
III. MODEL DEFINITION AND MESHING 
2D cylinder geometry with centrally located injector was 
considered .The mesh was created using GAMBIT 2.4.6.The 
engine geometry details and specification details are given 
below. Mesh generation plays an important role in obtaining 
accurate results. A quadrilateral mesh was created uniformly 
throughout the area and analyzed using FLUENT, ANSYS 
14.5 package. The complete meshed geometry contains 
10800 cell, 22040 faces and 10904 nodes. Fig.1 shows the 
meshed geometry.  
1) Connecting rod length: 150mm  
2) Length of Stroke: 180 mm  
3) Crank radius: 55 mm  
4) Crank shaft speed: 1500 rpm 
 
Fig. 1: Meshed Geometry of the Cylinder 
IV. GOVERNING EQUATIONS AND MODEL 
The basic approach of in-cylinder diesel combustion models 
are typically compressible turbulent flow. Apart from the 
complexity of turbulent model, the high pressure spray and 
resulting spray penetration, evaporation, and involvement of 
multiphase, multi-component nature only increases its 
complexity. Even then the nature of fluid is still governed by 
the 
basic 
equations 
including 
continuity 
(mass 
conservation), momentum (Navier-Stokes equation), energy 
and turbulence (k-ε model) equations. Of the three 
combustion modeling (thermodynamic, multidimensional 
and 
phenomenological 
modeling) 
the 
software 
use 
multidimensional modeling, i.e. CFD modeling [1]  
V. COMBUSTION SIMULATION 
In engine environments, the combustible mixture is subject 
to a turbulent flow and, once mixed, undergoes subsequent 
elementary reactions which convert the fuel vapor to 
complete and incomplete combustion products with the 
accompanying release heat. So, in IC engine simulations, 
combustion modeling mainly deals with two processes: first, 
low-temperature chemistry, which leads to auto ignition and 
produces 
intermediate 
species, 
and 
second, 
these 
 
Multi-Dimensional Modeling of Internal Combustion  
Engine Processes 
Vivek Kumar Pandey1 Rajiv Saxena2 Dr. R.R. Lal3 
1M.E. Scholar 2Associate Professor, LNCT Bhopal, M.P  
3Professor, Aisect University, Bhopal, M.P. India 
 
 
Multi-Dimensional Modeling of Internal Combustion Engine Processes  
(IJSRD/Vol. 1/Issue 10/2013/0032) 
 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
2183 
intermediate species trigger high-temperature reactions that 
contribute the main heat release, as well as further complete 
and incomplete combustion products. Another important 
task for combustion models is to properly account for the 
significance of the effect of turbulence on the combustion 
processes. The combustion of diesel fuel was considered 
which simulated using FLUENT, ANSYS 14.5 package is a 
single cylinder, single zone, multi-dimensional model was 
considered in analysis process. The mixture material, diesel-
air, properties were copied from the Fluent material database 
for combustion. Using species transport model of fluent the 
analysis is done. While using this model conservation 
equation for chemical species, ANSYS FLUENT predicts 
the local mass fraction of each species through the solution 
of convection diffusion equation for the ith species. This 
conservation equation has the form:  
 
 (1)  
Where Ri is the net rate of production of species i by 
chemical reaction. Si is the rate of creation by addition from 
the dispersed phase plus any user-defined sources. An 
equation of this form will be solved for N−1 species where 
N is the total number of fluid phase chemical species present 
in the system. Since the mass fraction of the species must 
sum to unity, the Nth mass fraction is determined as one 
minus the sum of the N − 1 solved mass fractions. To 
minimize numerical error, the Nth species should be 
selected as that species with the overall largest mass 
fraction, such as N2 when the oxidizer is air. [3] 
VI. COMPUTATIONAL METHODOLOGY AND 
BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 
After modeling the geometry, for analysis viscous standard 
k-e model is enabled for considering eddy dissipation. Since 
geometry is subjected to motion of piston, dynamic meshing 
is enabled subjected to suitable boundary condition for 
piston, cylinder, walls etc. Combustion in a IC engine 
involves the transient injection of finely atomized liquid fuel 
into the air at high temperature and pressure [1]. The fuel 
injection parameters like location of the injector, size of the 
injector, injection temperature and pressure, mass flow rate 
etc are having significant effect in diesel combustion 
modeling. The injection parameters and specifications are 
given below  
1) X-position: 113.68 mm  
2) Y- Velocity: 468 m/s  
3) Diameter: 0.286 mm  
4) Temperature: 341 K  
5) Flow rate: 0.001044 kg/S  
6) Start crank angle: 710 deg  
7) Stop crank angle: 725 deg 
VII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
 Cylinder pressure and Cylinder temperature  
A.
The modeled cylinder pressure data is shown in fig.2. From 
the graph the peak pressure generated by the software was 
approximately equal to 30 bars which is in agreement with 
the theoretical value. Also the maximum cycle temperature 
obtained was near 1700K (Fig.3). The static pressure and 
static temperature contours at the end of expansion was also 
generated by the software (shown in fig.4. and fig.5.) 
 
Fig. 2: Pressure v/s Flow time 
 
Fig. 3: Temperature v/s Flow Time 
 
Fig.4. Contours of static pressure 
 
Fig.5. Contours of static temperature 
Multi-Dimensional Modeling of Internal Combustion Engine Processes  
(IJSRD/Vol. 1/Issue 10/2013/0032) 
 
 
All rights reserved by www.ijsrd.com 
2184 
 CO2 Emission  
B.
The mass fraction of CO2 was generated by the simulating 
software and was found to be near 0.0048 at the end of 
expansion. (Fig.6) 
 
Fig.6. Mass fraction of CO2 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The model was created using Gambit, and the combustion 
phenomenon was analyzed using Fluent Ansys 14.5. The 
results show values of pressure and temperature comparable 
to theoretical values. Hence the developed model is suitable 
for predicting the combustion characteristics of 
a 
compressed ignition engine. By changing the injection 
timing, the peak pressure, temperature etc can be varied and 
can be used to find the optimal injection timing as well as 
the combustion  
REFERENCE 
[1]  
Lakshminarayanan, P. A. et. al, Modelling diesel 
combustion (Springer, 2009)  
[2]  
Dr. Ibtihal Al-Namie et. al., ―Study the Effect of 
Ceramic Coating on the Performance and Emissions 
of Diesel Engine", Journal of Engineering , August 
2012, Volume 18, Number 8,935-942.  
[3]  
Krishnan, D.B. et. al., " Performance of an Al-Si 
graphite particle composite piston in a diesel engine", 
Transactions of Wear, 1980,60(2), 205-215.  
[4]  
Murat Ciniviz et.al., " Ceramic Coating Applications 
and Research Fields for Internal Combustion 
Engines", Ceramic Coatings - Applications in 
Engineering, Feb. 2012,195-234.  
[5]  
Alkidas, 
A.C.," 
Performance 
and 
emissions 
achievements with an uncooled heavy duty, single 
cylinder diesel engine", SAE, vol. 890141, 1989.  
[6]  
Uzun, A., Cevik, I. and Akcil, M, "Effects of thermal 
barrier coating material on a turbocharged diesel 
engine performance", Surf. Coat. Technology,1999, 
116–119.  
[7]  
Spaniel, M., Macek, J., Divis, M. and Tichanek, R., 
‗‗Diesel 
engine 
head 
steady 
state 
analysis‘‘, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Middle 
European 
Construction and Design of Cars, 2003,2(3), 34–41.  
[8]  
M. Fadaei a, et. al., "New thermo-mechanical 
analysis of cylinder heads using a multi-field 
approach", Scientia Iranica, November 2010, 18 (1), 
66–74.  
[9]  
Parlak, A.," Experimental Investigation of Injection 
Advance and Compression Ratio of a Supercharged 
Ceramic Coated Diesel Engine", PhD Thesis, Sakarya 
University, Turkey (in Turkish), 2000.  
[10]  Gataowski, J.A., 'Evaluation of a Selectively Cooled 
Single Cylinder 0.5L Diesel Engine", SAE, Paper 
900693,USA, 1990. 
[11]   S Gavudhama K,  et. al., ―CFD Studies of 
Combustion in Diesel Engine‖, International Journal 
of Engineering Research and Applications (IJERA),  
Vol. 3, Issue 4, Jul-Aug 2013, pp.827-830 
[12]  Afify, E.M. & Klett, D.E. (1996), "The Effect Of 
Selective 
Insulation 
On 
The 
Performance, 
Combustion, And NOx Emissions Of A DI Diesel 
Engine", International & Congress and Exposition, 
Detroit, Michigan February 26-29.  
[13]  Rasihhan, Y. & Wallce F.J., Piston-Liner "Thermal 
Resistance Model for Diesel Engine Simulation", 
Proc. Inst. Mech. Engrs., 1991, Vol.205.  
[14]  J.Blazek," Computational Fluid Dynamics: Principles 
and Applications", Elsevier Science Ltd,2001,1-39  
[15]  Büyükkaya, E.; Yaşar, H.; Çelik, V. & Ekmekci, M.," 
Effects of Thermal Barrier Coating to Exhaust 
Emissions of a Turbocharged Diesel Engine", 
International 
Combustion 
Symposium, 
Bursa, 
Turkey, 21-23 July 1997, 21-23.  
  
