International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
234 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
Study of Design Improvement of Intake Manifold of Internal 
Combustion Engine 
 
Sachin Singla 
Student 
Mechanical Engg. 
Department 
Thapar University, Patiala 
Mr. Sumeet Sharma 
Associate Professor 
Mechanical Engg. 
Department 
Thapar University, Patiala 
Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
Professor 
Chemical Engg.  
Department 
Thapar University, Patiala 
 
ABSTRACT: For a better performance of an internal combustion engine, design of intake manifold 
is one of the important factor. It is required that equal mass of air fuel mixture is delivered to each 
cylinder of the engine. Unequal distribution of charge reduces the efficiency of the engine. Presented 
study aims at the design modification of the intake manifold so that almost equal velocity can be 
obtained at the end of each runner. For the study purpose Intake manifold of Maruti Wagnor was 
used. Experimental study was conducted on the manifold and variation in outlet velocity and outlet 
pressure was recorded at different inlet velocities. Further, three dimensional drawing of the intake 
manifold was made and CFD simulation was conducted using ANSYS FLUENT. Two models were 
studied by making some modifications in the actual manifold and thus an improved manifold design 
was suggested. Results show that nearly equal velocity was obtained at all the runner outlet and flow 
velocity at outlet 1 increased by 16%, and velocity in other outlets improved by approximately 5% to 
7% as compared to actual model. 
Keywords: Intake Manifold, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION:  
In an automobile, engine is one of the main component. Continuous research is going to make the 
engine more and more efficient and use of alternate fuels. The major challenge faced is to reduce the 
global carbon emission and to reduce the oil consumption. Now a day compressed natural gas (CNG) 
is widely used in the automobiles. Efficiency of an engine working on CNG is very less. When 
compared to the gasoline, it is seen that the average torque and power losses of CNG is in range of 
1.6 to 21.6% and 3 to 19.7% respectively [1]. The efficiency of an engine depends on many factors, 
design of intake manifold (IM) being one of them. The function of the IM is even distribution of a 
uniform mixture of fuel and air to all the cylinders. Even distribution is essential for a better 
performance and optimal efficiency. Design of the IM is thus very important for better engine 
performance. Length of the runner, diameter of the runner, plenum volume, smoothness of the joints, 
shape of the runners are the some of the factors which are considered during the design of the IM. 
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is very helpful in predicting the flow pattern inside the 
cylinder and the IM. Using the CFD can reduce the design modification time.  To analyze the 
physical phenomena which is involved in change of kinetic energy, renormalization group theory 
(RNG k- ε) turbulent model is used [2]. For an automobile different IM are used as per requirement 
and then the modifications are done as needed. But some general modifications are preferred for a 
good IM design. For the IM of a diesel engine, profile near the corners are made smooth so that 
reflecting shock waves at high velocity can be avoided. Some improvements in the plenum can also 
be made so that the flow can be easily directed into the runners [3]. With increase in the plenum 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
235 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
volume, the runner outlet vacuum decreases which leads to increase in efficiency and improved 
engine performance [4]. Improvement in the engine performance occurs with variation in the plenum 
length. At the low engine speeds, plenum length needs to be extended whereas at the high engine 
speeds, it needs to be shorten [5]. Design of the venture also effect the performance. It was seen that 
as the throat velocity was increased, break power was also increased [6]. According to the work of 
Tsogtjargal G. et al. out of IM of length reduced by 5cm, increased by 10cm and increased by 20cm, 
manifold with increased length showed the reduced fuel consumption at ideal conditions. In the 
straightway, IM increased by 10cm showed least fuel consumption, whereas in the traffic jam 
condition, simple runner gave the best results [7]. For the high speeds, runners with small pipe length 
and large diameter gives best results and at low speeds, large pipe length and small pipe diameter 
gives best results. On the same time, pipe diameter and length do not have significant influence on 
the specific fuel consumption and engine thermal efficiency [8]. For an engine with benefits of both, 
the two IM can be merged to form duel intake manifold [9]. Out of the spiral, helical, helical-spiral 
combined IM configurations, helical IM has highest volumetric efficiency, whereas Spiral-Helical 
combined manifold has 10% higher efficiency than Spiral manifold. At TDC of compression, 
helical-spiral combined intake manifold delivers higher mean swirl velocity [10]. With the 
introduction of helical grooves inside IM there was 25.6% gain in thermal efficiency, 23.5% and 
13.6% reduction in specific fuel consumption and in ignition delay respectively, 26.9% reduction in 
smoke emission, 6.6% reduction in 𝑁𝑂𝑥 formation, 15.6% reduction in hydrocarbon emission and 
36.47% reduction in carbon monoxide emission [11]. Introducing the helical threads inside the IM 
also effect the engine performance. Experiment performed with the 4mm width threads with pitch 
varied from 10mm to 25mm in steps of 5mm showed that better performance, as compared to other 
modified IMs, was obtained with IM with threads of 10mm pitch. There was a reduction of 12.5% 
and 0.3% in hydrocarbon emissions and carbon monoxide emission respectively [12]. Out of the IM 
with internal acme threads, buttress threads, knuckle threads all having a pitch of 2 mm and normal 
IM, there was an increase of 14.5% in brake thermal efficiency, reduction of 11.62% in bsfc and 
increase of 9.72% in volumetric efficiency as compared to normal manifold when buttress threaded 
manifold used. For normal manifold, knuckle, acme and buttress threaded manifold exhaust gas 
temperature observed was 223 0C, 232 0C, 238 0C and 247 0C respectively [13]. For this study, intake 
manifold of a naturally aspirated, four-stroke petrol engine was selected. Flow pattern inside the 
intake manifold was studied using the CFD for the modification of the design of the intake manifold. 
2. 
DESIGN MODELLING AND MESH GENERATION: 
Using a 3-D CAD designing software the modelling of the intake manifold was done for the CFD 
analysis. After the modelling, this geometry was imported into the ANSYS workbench and fluent 
meshing was done.  
 
Fig 1: Actual 3-D Model 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
236 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
For the study three models were developed, Moodel-1 (actual model), Model-2 (without internal 
projections) and Model-3 (without internal projections at plenum and without curve at the end of 
runners). The actual model has the final mesh of 2673528 elements. Figure 1 shows the actual 3-D 
model and figure 2 shows the flow volume model of all the three models used for the study. 
     
     
 
 
 
Model 1 
 
 
Model 2 
 
 
Model 3 
Fig 2: Flow volume model of three different models studies 
3. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP:  
For the experimental purpose, pressure taps were attached at the runner outlets so that pressure can 
be measured at the outlets. The inlet condition was varied by regulating the blower and air at 
different inlet velocities was introduced in the IM. Air velocity at different outlet was recorded with 
the help of anemometer and the pressure difference between inlet and outlet of the manifold was 
recorded with the help of U-tube manometer. The intake manifold used to conduct study is shown in 
figure 3 and the experimental setup is shown in figure 4. 
   
 
                
 
 
Fig 3: Intake manifold Figure  
 
 Fig 4: Experimental setup 
 
4. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: 
4.1. 
Experimental results: 
Air was introduced in the intake manifold at the different velocities and corresponding velocities at 
all the runners were recorded. On the same time, pressure drop was also recorded with the help of the 
U-tube manometer. Figure 5 shows the anemometer data and figure 6 shows the pressure at the outlet 
of different velocities.  
From the Bernoulli Theorem we know that pressure and velocity are inversely proportional. Thus 
from the graphs we can conclude that velocity in the outlet 1 is minimum and at outlet 4 it is 
maximum. By temperature variation test it is noticed that the density change is very small and 
remain almost equal to the standard density of air at NTP. 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
237 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
 
Fig 5: Velocities at outlets with variable inlet velocities 
 
Fig 6: Pressure at outlets on variable inlet velocities 
Destructive test was performed for the study of internal geometry of intake manifold. It was seen that 
there were many hidden projections inside the manifold which causes restriction to the flow and thus 
leads to uneven distribution at the outlets. Figure 7 shows these hidden projections which were not 
visible at first. 
 
Fig 7: Hidden Projections 
4.2. 
CFD results: 
CFD analysis was done on all the three models to find the velocity and pressure variation between 
the different outlets at given inlet velocity. The CFD simulation results of the actual model were 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
238 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
verified by comparing with the experiment results. Velocity vector view of actual model at inlet 
velocity of 18m/s is shown in figure 8. 
 
           
 
Fig 8: Velocity Vector (Model-1, 18m/s) 
 
 
(a) Model-1 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
239 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
 
(b) Model-2 
 
 
(c) Model-3 
Fig 9: Velocity profile at different outlets (18m/s) 
Velocity profile at the different outlets, as obtained from fluent, for all the three models at 18m/s 
inlet velocity are shown in figure 9. Three graphs shown in figure 10 shows the variation of outlet 
velocities with respect to variation in inlet velocity for all the three IM models. From all these graphs 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
240 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
we can conclude that outlet velocities of runner 2 and runner 3 is almost equal and variation can be 
seen in runner 1 and runner 4. This can be validated with experimental results too for model-1. 
      
 
 
 
(a) Model-1  
 
 
 
 
(b) Model-2 
 
(c) Model-3 
Fig 10: Velocities at outlets at different inlet velocities 
To study the design modification, the outlet velocities for all the three models are examined 
carefully. Figure 11, 12, 13 and 14 shows the variation in each outlet velocity of all the three models 
at different inlet velocities. 
 
     
 
Fig 11: Outlet verses Inlet velocities at 
outlet-1 
Fig 12: Outlet verses Inlet velocities at 
outlet-2
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
241 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
 
     
 
Fig 13: Outlet verses Inlet velocities at 
outlet-3 
Fig 14: Outlet verses Inlet velocities at 
outlet-4
 
Outlet 1: At outlet 1 it is seen that actual model shows the least velocity as compared to the two 
modified models. It can be also seen that for actual model, outlet 1 has lowest velocity out of all four 
outlets. Thus it can be concluded that the projections at runner 1 has actual bad design. 
Outlet 2 and Outlet 3: It is observed that velocity at outlet 2 and outlet 3 have nearly equal velocity 
for model-1 and model-3 but have slightly higher velocity for model-2. This is because there is no 
projections inside plenum and curves design at the end is good. The other reason for equal velocity is 
their position which is just below the inlet of IM. Thus it is seen that the position of the runners is 
also important factor in designing the manifold. 
Outlet 4: It is observed that at the outlet 4, actual model shows more velocity than the modified 
designs. This may be due to the projection of depth cut above the runner 4. Thus it can be concluded 
that this inside projection of deep cut plays an important role for a good manifold design. 
From the above discussion it is noticed that the model is good at the curve designing part and depth 
cut above the runner 4, which help in equal velocity at the outlets, whereas there are some bad design 
projections at runner 1. 
5. 
CONCLUSIONS: 
From the above study it may be concluded that: 
i. 
The model has good design of runners and the curves at the end are helpful in achieving the 
equal velocity at outlet. 
ii. 
Position of the runners with respect to the inlet also plays an important factor. 
iii. 
Faulty design of the plenum is the reason for the variation of outlet velocity. 
iv. 
Inside projections near the runner 1 causes restriction to the passage of flow, which leads to 
low velocity and high pressure loss at outlet 1 in actual model. 
v. 
Intake manifold geometry with plenum chamber free from unwanted projections and depth 
cuts show good result. It is seen that there is an increase of 16% in flow velocity at outlet 1, and 
velocity in other outlets improved by approximately 5% to 7%. In modified design nearly equal 
velocity is obtained at all runner outlets as compared to actual intake manifold. 
 
 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
 
www.ijetmas.com  March 2015, Volume 3 Special Issue, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
242 Sachin Singla, Sumeet Sharma, Dr. D. Gangacharyulu 
 
NOMENCLATURE:  
 
IM 
-Intake Manifold 
 
 
bsfc   -Break Specific Fuel Consumption 
 
CFD -Computational Fluid Dynamics 
CNG -Computational Fluid Dynamics 
 
3-D 
-Three Dimensional  
 
CAD -Computer Aided Design 
 
REFERENCES: 
[1] Maxwell T.T. and Jones J.C. (1995). Alternative Fuels: Emissions, Economics and Performance. 
USA Society of Auto motive Engineers: SAE Inc. 
[2] Benny Paull and Ganesan V., “Flow field development in a direct injection diesel engine with 
different”, International Journal of Engineering, Science and Technology, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp.80-91, 
(2010). 
[3] Safari, M., Ghamari, M., & Nasiritosi, A. (2003). Intake manifold optimization by using 3-D 
CFD analysis (No. 2003-32-0073). SAE Technical Paper. 
[4] Kumar, M., & Kumar, P. (2013, June). CFD Simulation of Air Flow in Intake Manifold of SI 
Engine. International Journal of Enhanced Research in Science Technology & Engineering, Vol. 2 
Issue 6, June-2013 on (pp. 58-68).  
[5] Ceviz, M. A., & Akın, M. (2010). Design of a new SI engine intake manifold with variable length 
plenum. Energy Conversion and Management, 51(11), 2239-2244. 
[6] Arali, S. M., & Kulkarni, V. V. (2013, April). Design and analysis of fuel intake system for 
biogas operated spark ignition engine. In Energy Efficient Technologies for Sustainability (ICEETS), 
2013 International Conference on (pp. 665-669). IEEE. 
[7] Tsogtjargal, G., Bayarsuren, B., & Sarantuya, S. (2012, September). Improvement on fuel 
consumption by intake manifold design development of gasoline engine. In Strategic Technology 
(IFOST), 2012 7th International Forum on (pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
[8] Costa, R. C., de Morais Hanriot, S., & Sodré, J. R. (2014). Influence of intake pipe length and 
diameter on the performance of a spark ignition engine. Journal of the Brazilian Society of 
Mechanical Sciences and Engineering, 36(1), 29-35. 
[9] Saravanan, D., Gokhale, A., & Karthikeyan, N. (2014). Design and Development of a Novel 
Charge Boosting System for a Single Cylinder SI Engine (No. 2014-01-1707). SAE Technical Paper. 
[10] Paul, B., & Ganesan, V. (2010). Flow field development in a direct injection diesel engine with 
different manifolds. International Journal of Engineering, Science and Technology, 2(1), 80-91. 
[11] Prasad, S. L. V., & Pandurangadu, V. (2011). Reduction of emissions by intensifying air swirl in 
a single cylinder DI diesel engine with modified inlet manifold. International Journal of Applied 
Engineering and Technology, 1(1), 18-23  
[12] Phaneendra, V., Pandurangadu, V., & Chandramouli, M. (2012). Performance evaluation of a 
four stroke compression ignition engine with various helical threaded intake manifolds. International 
Journal of Applied Research in Mechanical Engineering, Vol. 2 Issue 1, 2012.  
[13] Sambhe, R. U., & Shrirao, P. N. (2014). Performance analysis of single cylinder (DI) diesel 
engine by air swirl induction with internally threaded inlet manifolds. International Journal of 
Mechanical Engineering and Technology (IJMET), 5(7), 144–150 
 
