 
Study on Existence & Effectiveness of Turbulence in 
combustion chamber of a Diesel engine 
D.Prakash 
Bundelkhand University 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Jhansi, India 
duraiprakash83@gmail.com  
 
Abstract 
 
Complete combustion will leads to significant improvement in engine performance as well as reduction of 
pollutants in emission. Researches emphasize that analyzing the fluid dynamics in combustion chamber will show 
the right path to achieve maximum thermal efficiency in diesel engine. Due to the high velocities inside the 
combustion chamber the flow has been termed as turbulence. Heat transfer, fuel air mixing and rate of combustion 
were increased due to this turbulence. This turbulence categorized as squish, swirl and tumble. The rotational motion 
of the fluid mass within the cylinder is termed as swirl. It can be generated by means of suitable design of inlet 
manifolds, valves and piston faces. It improves the combustion process by rapid fuel air mixing. Radially inward 
flow occurring at the end of the compression stroke is called as squish which helps with better fuel air mixing. After 
reaching the TDC the squish motion generates a secondary flow called as tumble. In this paper we put front the 
existence of these turbulence and significant effects on the complete combustion in a diesel engine.  
Keywords: Turbulence, combustion chamber, swirl, squish, tumbles 
1. Introduction 
Often called the heart of the engine, the fuel injection system [1] is without any doubt one of the 
most important system. It meters the fuel delivery according to engine requirements, it generates the high 
injection pressure required for fuel atomization, for air fuel mixing and for combustion and contributes to 
the fuel distribution[2]in the combustion system hence it significantly affects engine performance 
emissions & noise. Liquid fuel is injected through the nozzle by the fuel injection system into the cylinder 
through the end of compression stroke. The liquid jet leaving the nozzle becomes turbulent [3] and 
spreads out as it entrains and mixes with the in-cylinder air. The sprayed fuel stream encounters the 
resistance from the dense in-cylinder fluids and breaks into droplets. Then they vaporize and mix with the 
high pressure, temperature in cylinder fluids. It causes the fuel to ignite spontaneously and initiate the 
combustion at various locations, where desired condition is available.  
During the intake stroke the air enters into the combustion chamber based on the geometry of 
inlet valve & engine head swirl is generated. During compression stroke air get compressed to a high 
pressure, when piston approaches TDC fuel is injected with very high pressure. Fuel gets vaporized and 
get ignited where the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) is maximum. So in order to reduce the ignition delay 
TKE locations should be more in combustion chamber. The geometry of piston crown, valve face, and 
combustion chamber head can decide the TKE points inside the combustion chamber. Zhang et al. [4] 
carried out an experimental study aiming to investigate the effects of combustion chamber geometry on 
combustion process in an optically accessible direct injection diesel engine. Flame movement behaviors 
such as the distribution of flame velocity vectors and the averaged flame velocity inside and outside the 
combustion chamber are measured by means of cross-correlation method. Swirl motion of the air is 
 
usually generated due to the design of the intake port. A good intake port design will generate higher 
swirl and help to improve combustion [5]. When there is swirl in the in-cylinder air, the swirl–squish 
interaction produces a complex turbulent flow field at the end of compression. Further, intensification of 
swirl and turbulence are observed around TDC of compression. Around this time, most of the in-cylinder 
air is compressed into a smaller diameter combustion chamber. Thus, by conservation of angular 
momentum, as the radius of rotation reduces, the speed of rotation increases. Intensification of turbulence 
is due to the highly turbulent squish and reverse-squish motions of the air near TDC of compression. 
Because of these, usually two peaks in turbulence, one just before TDC and the other just after the TDC, 
are observed [6]. Prasad et al. observed that highly re-entrant piston bowl and without a central projection 
was found to be the best for swirl and turbulent kinetic energy intensification around top dead center. [7]   
 
2. Fuel injection system 
In diesel engines the Analysis of fuel spray with various injection orientations has high influence 
on engine performance as well as exhaust gas emissions Dr. Hiregoudar Yerrennagoudaru et.al., 
conducted research on diesel injection system with variety of hole & fin combination and 
orientations(Fig.1). 
 
  
                           
              
 
Fig.1 Injectors with fin and without fin model           Fig.2 8-Fin model               Fig.3 10-Fin model 
 
The results were compared with the results of measurements at steady state conditions and fuel 
injection characteristics are required to deal effectively with major diesel engine design problem 
achieving sufficiently rapid fuel-air mixing rates to complete the fuel burning Process in the time 
available(Refer Fig.4). The fuel injector orientation plays very important role in fuel air mixing. A single 
cylinder four stroke DI diesel engine with fuel injector having multi-hole nozzle injector is considered for 
the analysis.  
                    
 
4(A). Brake Thermal efficiency Vs BMEP                4(B) Hydrocarbon in PPM Vs Load in kW 
Fig.4 Comparison among various configuration of nozzle tip 
 
The geometry of the diesel fuel injection nozzle and fuel flow characteristics in the nozzle 
significantly affects the processes of fuel atomization, combustion and formation of pollutant emissions in 
a diesel engine. In this experiment it has been investigated the effect of injector nozzle holes and models 
created such as fins for fuel spray on the performance of diesel engine such as fuel consumption and fuel 
in-engine cylinder the analysis of a swirl diesel engine research also reveals the effects of swirl in 
combustion chamber of a diesel engine depending on the shape, angle, and area of the jet passage, effects 
of the pressure, heat release HC, and CO concentrations[11]. 
 
3. Combustion process 
 
In a diesel engine, the fuel is introduced into the chamber by the fuel injector, which breaks the 
fuel into tiny droplets that spread through the compressed air. As soon as the cool fuel comes in contact 
with the hot air, it takes heat from the air and an envelope of vapour forms around the droplets. The air 
that has cooled, have to regain its heat from the main body of air and as it does, the vapour also becomes 
hotter until it ignites. As soon as this occurs, the heat of combustion supplies the necessary heat to 
completely vaporize the fuel.  
If the air is stationary in the combustion chamber, the burnt gas from the first combustion will 
surround each burning droplets and will suffocate it. If, on the other hand, the air is continuously moving 
the burnt gas will move away from each fuel particle and fresh air will take its place, ensuring a plentiful 
supply of oxygen for continued combustion. 
Again, if the particles are very fine, the total surface area exposed to the compressed air will be 
large, and great amount of fuel will be vaporized almost immediately. Once combustion starts, entire 
vaporized fuel will be burnt rapidly, and a very quick and high pressure rise will occur in the combustion 
chamber. 
 
4. The stages of combustion  
Combustion of diesel engine may be divided into four distinct stages or phases: 
A. Delay period. 
This is the period of crank-shat rotation between the start of injection and the first 
ignition of the fuel charge. During this time, fuel is being injected continuously. 
B. Uncontrolled combustion. 
Once ignition of the fuel in the combustion chamber starts all the fuel that has 
accumulated during the delay period burns very rapidly, which causes a sudden pressure rise. 
This stage usually occurs from few degrees before TDC to a few degrees after TDC, giving a high 
cylinder pressure at the beginning of the power stroke. Obviously, the fuel injected during the 
uncontrolled combustion period burns as soon as it is injected.  
C. Controlled combustion. 
When the uncontrolled combustion completed, the fuel burns as it is injected into the 
combustion chamber, the rate of admission of the fuel giving accurate control of the cylinder 
pressure. Immediate combustion the fuel as it is injected during the controlled combustion period 
is ensured by the heat and pressure generated during the uncontrolled combustion period. At large 
throttle openings, the injection and the controlled combustion periods are longer than at small 
throttle openings, the rate of admission of the fuel being constant for the period during which it 
lasts. This means that the maximum  cylinder pressure (as a result of combustion) for a particular 
engine is the same regardless of the throttle opening, the extra power being derived from longer 
combustion period. 
D. After- burning   
 
During the controlled combustion period, almost entire fuel burns. However, some fuel 
particles fail to find the necessary air for combustion during this stage of combustion and these 
particles burn after the injection has ceased. Again, some of the particles of the fuel that settled on 
the combustion chamber walls during injection evaporate and burn during this final stage. 
 
 
5. Combustion chambers with turbulence effect 
 
In some diesel engines, the combustion chamber is formed in the cylinder head, while in others it 
is formed in the crown of the piston. Regardless of where it is situated, the combustion chamber must be 
designed so that it is capable of producing maximum turbulence, not only during injection, but also when 
combustion is in progress. This high degree of turbulence is necessary for three reasons: 
i. 
To ensure complete mixing of the fuel and air. 
ii. 
To provide a continuous supply of air to the burning fuel particles. 
iii. 
To sweep burnt gas from the injector area so that, as more fuel is injected, it meets fresh air. 
When regard to the mixing of the fuel and air, it must be remembered that the fuel charge is not 
injected into the combustion chamber until the piston is 30 and 15 degree of crankshaft rotation from 
TDC. Suppose the speed of the engine is 1900 rpm, the time available for the fuel to be injected, mixed 
with the air and burnt is approximately 1/500th of a second. It should be obvious that high air turbulence is 
necessary to mix the air and fuel thoroughly and quickly. The duration of „delay period‟ is largely 
dependent on the efficient mixing of fuel and air in combustion chamber. If mixing is quick and efficient, 
the delay period will be greatly reduced and this in turn reduce diesel knock. On the other hand, if the 
mixing is slow and inefficient, a longer delay period will result and diesel knock will become more 
severe. If the supply of fresh air required to prevent „suffocation‟ of the burning fuel particles (and to 
sweep burnt gas from the injection area) is not continuous, complete combustion cannot take place. If 
combustion is incomplete, thermal efficiency must drop with a corresponding increase in fuel 
consumption and a loss of power. Complete combustion must also be achieved if a condition known as 
„crankcase dilution‟ is to be avoided. This condition is caused by unburnt fuel passing the rings and 
mixing with the lubricating oil in the crankcase. As a result of this contamination, the lubricating 
properties of the oil are greatly reduced and severe engine wear results. The paramount aim of 
combustion chamber design, therefore must be to create turbulence  so that the atomized fuel and air are 
thoroughly mixed and complete combustion is achieved. 
Due to the amount of research carried out over the years, many types of combustion chamber have 
been developed. These are generally divided into two categories: 
I. 
Direct injection combustion chambers 
II. 
Indirect injection combustion chambers 
However, engines are usually classified as either „direct injection‟ or „indirect injection‟ the word 
„combustion chamber‟ being dropped. 
 
The main types combustion chamber in use today have been classified as follows: 
A. Open combustion chamber (direct injection) 
B. Pre-combustion chamber (indirect injection) 
C. Compression swirl combustion chamber (indirect injection) 
D. Air cell or energy cell combustion chamber (indirect injection) 
The choice of the combustion chamber design for a particular engine depends largely on its rpm, its 
principle of operation (two or four stroke), the size of the engine and the purpose for which it is to be 
used. 
 
5.1 The open combustion chamber 
 
The trend in modern high-speed diesel engines is towards the open combustion chamber. This 
system has developed from a small combustion chamber in the cylinder head to the modern system, 
which makes use of a flat cylinder head and a specially shaped cavity in the piston crown. It is usual for 
the piston to protrude slightly above the block surface, giving minimum clearance between the piston 
crown and the head, thus ensuring good turbulence and combustion within the piston cavity. Almost all 
two stroke diesel use this system because of the ease of „scavenging‟. 
 
A multi-hole-type injector with a wide spray angle is located directly above the piston cavity and 
sprays into this cavity where since there is very little clearance between the piston crown and the head 
almost all the compressed air is concentrated. High injection pressure is needed to ensure droplet 
penetration and efficient air-fuel mixing. 
 
 
5.1.1 Piston cavities and squish 
 
Piston cavities are cast in the piston crown and take many different forms. The most common 
type is the „toroidal piston cavity‟- a circular cavity usually symmetric about the piston axis with a small 
cone projecting upwards from the bottom of the cavity towards the cylinder head(Refer Fig.5). Some 
manufacturers favour a simple hemispherical cavity while others use a dished piston crown, although the 
latter is fairly rare. Yet another manufacturer uses a simple deep cylindrical cavity, which is almost flat on 
the bottom. It is important to realize that each cavity must be used in conjunction with a particular injector 
nozzle and the fitting of a nozzle with slightly different spray angle can result in holes being burnt in the 
piston crown.  
                                        
 
Fig.5 Toroidal Piston chamber                                    Fig.6 Hemispherical chamber                                    
 
Regardless of the piston cavity design the turbulence in the cylinder is created in the same way. 
As the piston approaches TDC on the compression stroke, the major portion of the air in the cylinder is 
compressed into the piston cavity. Because of the „squish‟ effect a high velocity is imparted to the air 
when it moves towards the piston cavity, thus causing a high degree of rotational turbulence in the piston 
cavity itself. The fuel injector is positioned above the piston so that fuel is injected directly into the 
turbulent air in the piston cavity, promoting efficient air fuel mixing. It should be mentioned here that 
some engine manufacturers such as perkins, have the toroidal cavity in piston slightly offset to promote 
swirl in predetermined direction. 
 
Squish may be defined as the rapid movement of the air being compressed in the cylinder of an 
open combustion chamber engine, from the cylinder walls towards the center of the combustion chamber. 
It is most effectively created by using either a toroidal cavity piston or a plain cavity piston, the crown of 
which has only the necessary clearance from the cylinder head when it is at TDC. As the piston 
approaches TDC on the compression stroke, the air trapped between the squish band on the piston 
periphery and the cylinder head is forced inwards at high velocity, into the cavity in the piston crown. At 
or near the center of the cavity, air meeting air cause mutual deflection towards the bottom of the piston 
cavity, beginning the circular turbulence . the degree of squish produced is largely dependent on the width 
of the squish band formed on the piston crown, with maximum squish velocity occurring at 
approximately 8° before TDC. Another design of combustion chamber utilizing squish to cause 
turbulence known as a „squish lip‟, it has a much larger squish band than the conventional toroidal cavity 
piston and because of this increased area, the air flow velocity is increased, improving combustion. 
Usually some means of imparting a swirling motion to the air as it enters the cylinder on the induction 
stroke is used, giving the air moving towards the center of the combustion chamber on the compression 
stroke a swirling motion, which helps to promote turbulence. 
 
Sunil kumar reddy et.al., conducted experimental analysis on grooved piston insert with various 
configuration of grooves (fig.7), results gives strong evidence of maximization of brake thermal 
efficiency occurs when rate of turbulence effect increase in the combustion chamber. The research reveals 
the significant effect on emission gases. The exhibits show the combustion efficiency improvement at the 
same time considerable reduction in emission gases [8]. 
 
 
Fig.7 Photographic view of Brass crown piston with various configurations of grooves  
(BP-Plain brass piston, BP6- brass piston with 6 grooves, BP9- brass piston with 9 grooves, BP12-brass 
piston with 12 grooves) 
            
 
(8A) Brake thermal efficiency Vs power                       (8B) carbon monoxide % Vs Power 
Fig.8 comparison among various groove configurations        
Somender Singh has come up with a way to provide a faster, hence more efficient burn, with less loss of 
heat, through his design to improve turbulence in combustion chambers. His patented work was been 
featured in the Sept. 24 2004 Popular Science magazine, and has been written about extensively on the 
net. He created grooves, channels and passages (Refer fig.9&10) with different configuration in cylinder 
head, the attempt of generating high turbulence inside the combustion chamber. He recorded drastic 
improvement in thermal efficiency. Results from a dynamometer test by the Automotive Research 
Association of India (ARAI) showed a reduction of 42.5% in BSFC / fuel consumption when fully 
loaded, producing more torque and power at lower temperatures. The Patent, awarded in May, 2001, 
describes a combustion chamber design layout of grooves or channels or passages formed in the squish 
band to further enhance turbulence in the charge prior to ignition as compared to existing designs with 
squish bands or hemispherical layouts in internal combustion engines. These grooves or channels or 
passages after ignition direct the flame front to cause multipoint ignition during the combustion cycle 
resulting in the following distinct advantages over existing designs in practice. First, quicker and 
complete clean burn combustion; second, lower operating temperatures due to the higher flame velocities; 
third, enhanced torque and power through the entire range resulting in better fuel economy with lower 
emissions; and fourth, smoother engine operation through the entire range, enhancing engine life[9]. 
 
Fig. 9 Sectional view of Cylinder head with grooves, channels and passages  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10 Bottom view of Cylinder head with grooves, channels and passages  
 
Issac Joshua ramesh lalvani et,al., investigated the combustion, performance and emission 
characteristics of a diesel engine powered with turbulence inducer piston (TIP)(Fig.11). The modified 
engine with turbulence inducer piston showed improved brake thermal efficiency, combustion 
characteristics and reduced hydro carbon, carbon monoxide and smoke emission. Nevertheless the 
nitrogen oxide emissions were slightly higher than the conventional unmodified engine [12]. 
 
Fig.11 Turbulence Inducer Piston (TIP)  
 
5.1.2 Directional ports 
 
In order to achieve the necessary swirling motion in four stroke engines using the open 
combustion chamber system, directional ports are used. These curved induction ports impart a spiraling 
motion to the incoming air, which not only continues during the compression stroke but is intensified. 
Almost all manufactures use the combination of spiraling intake air and piston-induced squish to achieve 
effective turbulence in direct injection engines. The shape and position of the inlet port are directly 
responsible for the swirl characteristics of the incoming air, and a normal type of inlet valve is used for 
admitting the air to the cylinder. Some of the larger diesel engines use two directional ports and, of course 
two inlet valves to admit the air charge. Engines designed for automotive work, however use only one 
directional port and one or two inlet valves per cylinder. In earlier designs, masked valves were used to 
induce a directional swirl into the incoming air charge. The mask consisted of a curved deflecting shield 
located between the valve seat and the stem. In operation the masked valve had to be prevented from 
rotating to ensure mask alignment and subsequent correct air deflection. Because of the restriction this 
design imposed on incoming air flow, manufacturers have discontinued its use in modern diesel engines. 
 
 
 
 
5.1.3 Tangential ports 
 
Tangential inlet ports are used in two stroke diesel engines to create air turbulence. These ports 
are situated in the lower half of the cylinder liner and are machined at a tangent to the liner walls. The 
reason for this is to impart a rotary swirl to the air entering the cylinder. Tangential ports used in some 
large two stroke diesel engines are designed in such a way that the incoming air is deflected towards the 
top of the cylinder. This gives the air a swirling motion in the form of a spiral as it enters the cylinder, 
helping to achieve efficient cylinder scavenging as well as promoting turbulence given to the incoming air 
by the tangential ports not only continues, but is accelerated as the air is compressed on the compression 
stroke. This ensures good mixing of the air and the injected fuel with the result that the fuel charge is 
burnt efficiently. 
 
Advantages of open combustion chambers 
a. Due to its compact form, the surface area of the combustion chamber is small, resulting in a 
relatively low heat loss to the cooling system, thus giving high thermal efficiency. 
b.  Because of the low heat loss, the compressed air loses very little heat, giving good cold starting 
ability without the need for heater plugs. 
c. Again because of low heat loss, low compression ratios may be employed, while still giving good 
starting and efficient combustion. 
 
Disadvantages of open combustion chambers 
a. Since a number of small holes are used in the injector nozzle, instead of one large hole, blocking 
by carbon deposits is fairly common. 
b. To ensure penetration of the fuel particles into the compressed air, high injection pressures are 
necessary. This suggests the need to maintain injection equipment to a higher standard than 
would be necessary if lower injection pressures were required. 
c. Rough running at low speeds occurs due to the long delay period that results from rather limited 
turbulence. In this design, turbulence is largely dependent on the speed of the incoming air, which 
obviously increases with engine speed. 
 
5.2 Precombustion chambers 
 
A Precombustion chamber is a small auxiliary chamber situated in the cylinder head and 
connected directly to the main combustion chamber by a small passage (Fig.12) . In some designs, the 
Precombustion chamber is separated from the main chamber by a perforated plate made from heat 
resistant alloy.  
 
When the piston is at TDC on compression stroke, the major portion of the air charge has been 
forced through the connecting passage into the Precombustion chamber. The remainder of the air is 
contained in the main chamber between the piston crown and the cylinder head. Some engine 
manufacturers use a piston with a dish shaped cavity in the crown, while others use a piston with a flat 
crown in conjunction with a Precombustion chamber. When a dished piston is used, between 35 to 40 
percent of the air is displaced from the cylinder on the compression stroke and is forced into the 
Precombustion chamber, the remainder being left in the main combustion chamber. When the injection 
takes place, the fuel charge is injected into the hot compressed air in the Precombustion chamber and 
ignition occurs. The subsequent burning of the fuel charge produces a substantial pressure rise in the 
confined space of the Precombustion chamber and, owing to this increase in pressure; particles of burning 
and unburnt fuel are forced violently through the narrow connecting passage into the main combustion 
chamber between the piston crown and the cylinder head. Any unburnt or partly burnt fuel particles mix 
with the air present, and the combustion process is completed in the main chamber. Because of the 
restricted passage connecting the Precombustion chamber to the cylinder and the beginning of 
combustion in that chamber, the sudden pressure rise from the uncontrolled combustion occurs largely 
with within the chamber with minimal effect in the engine cylinder. Thus the high cylinder pressures are 
eliminated, keeping diesel knock to a minimum and reducing internal stress in the engine. 
 
 
Fig.12 Precombustion chamber                                    
 
Caterpillar used Precombustion chambers in its first diesel engines and is still using them, to a 
lesser extent, in its heavy-duty engines. The design is uncommon in that the Precombustion chamber is 
not cast or machined in the head, but is separate „screw-in‟ unit into which the injector is directly fitted. 
The engine pistons have a heat resistant insert fitted into the piston crown directly below the outlet from 
the Precombustion chamber. This protects the alloy piston crown from the burning fuel particles, which 
are ejected at high velocity from the Precombustion chamber and which would eventually burn right 
through the piston crown. Because of the combustion characteristics, the degree of atomization of the fuel 
charge need not be as great as with direct injection engines, so that low injection pressures and pintle-type 
injector nozzles are usually employed. Caterpillar engines are a notable exception to the rule, using a 
single-hole nozzle of the firm‟s own design, featuring a very large orifice. 
 
Advantages of Precombustion chamber 
a. The pintle-type nozzle usually used in conjunction with Precombustion chambers has a relatively 
large orifice, plus a moving pintle, so that blockage due to carbon deposits is practically 
eliminated. 
b. The fuel does not have to be as finely atomized as for direct-injection engines and consequently 
injection pressures are lower.  
c. Because of high turbulence and efficient mixing of the fuel and air, the fuel quality does not have 
to be as high as with other types of combustion chamber. 
d. Engine operation is smooth because maximum cylinder pressure during combustion is low. 
 
Disadvantages of Precombustion chamber 
a. In almost all types, heater plugs must be used when starting the engine in cold weather, because 
of the heat lost from the compressed air to the relatively large combustion chamber wall area. 
b. The heat lost from the compressed air to the walls and at the throat of the Precombustion chamber 
is considerable and generally engines using this system have relatively low thermal efficiency and 
high fuel consumption. 
c. Because of the heat loss to the combustion chamber, high compression ratios must be employed 
to achieve the necessary compressed air temperatures for efficient ignition. 
 
5.3 Compression swirl combustion chamber 
 
Although the trend appears to be towards direct injection, the compression swirl system is still 
very popular in the smaller automotive engines. A basic swirl chamber consists of an approximately 
spherical chamber in the cylinder head connected to the cylinder by a small passage. The passage joins to 
the side of the chamber at a tangent. This ensures that the air entering the chamber through the passage on 
the compression stroke swirls around inside the spherical chamber. The fuel is injected at a right angle to 
the swirling air, ensuring complete mixing. As soon as the pressure rise due to combustion is sufficient, a 
mixture of burnt, burning and unburnt fuel is ejected violently into the main chamber in the piston crown. 
 
 
Fig.13 Compression swirl combustion chamber                                  
The most popular compression swirl chamber used in modern high-speed diesel engines would 
appear to be based on sir Harry Ricardo‟s „comet‟ design (Fig.13), of which there are many variants. This 
compression swirl chamber consists of a basic spherical chamber and tangential passage but in addition 
the top of the piston has a depression in its crown, which acts as part of the combustion chamber when the 
piston is at TDC, only very slight clearance being allowed between the flat of the piston crown and the 
head. The swirl chamber itself is made in two parts. As it formed in the cylinder head, the top half of the 
chamber is indirectly cooled by the engine‟s cooling system, but the bottom half is made of special heat 
resisting alloy steel, or in some cases satellite, and is not cooled in anyway. An air spaced is used to 
insulate the bottom half of the combustion chamber from the cylinder head, the only contact being a small 
area of the mounting flange that touches the cylinder head. This small contact area provides minimal 
conduction, keeping the bottom half of the combustion chamber hot so that it will heat the incoming air, 
and so reduce the delay period and improve combustion. 
 
 
As the piston approaches TDC on the compression stroke, from 50 to 85 percent of the air 
(depending on the particular model of the chamber) is forced through the tangential passage and 
compressed in the swirl chamber. Because the connecting passage is tangential to the swirl chamber, the 
air entering the chamber is given a rapid circular swirling motion. The velocity of the swirling air is 
dependent on the engine rpm, so as the engine speed is increased and the air velocity increases, greater 
turbulence results. The fuel injector is positioned in such a way that when injection occurs, fuel is sprayed 
across and at right angles to the swirling air. When combustion begins, a pressure rise occurs in the swirl 
chamber and when the pressure in the chamber becomes greater than that of the incoming air, burning and 
partly burnt fuel particles are ejected at high velocity from the swirl chamber into the air remaining in the 
cavity in the piston crown. Turbulence results so particles are thoroughly mixed, completing combustion 
of the fuel charge. Because of the heat lost to the large surface area of the swirl chamber particularly the 
upper part on compression stroke cold starting devices are generally needed to allow easy starting in cold 
weather.  
 
The compression swirl combustion chamber may easily be confused with the Precombustion 
chamber, since they are both separate chambers in the cylinder head in which fuel is injected and 
combustion starts. It is here that the similarity ends. The passage connecting the swirl chamber to the 
cylinder is much larger than the passage connecting the Precombustion chamber to the cylinder. Again the 
air enters the swirl chamber at a tangent and has the fuel sprayed across it, while air entering the 
Precombustion chamber does so centrally and has the fuel sprayed directly into it. Low injection pressures 
are used with compression swirl chambers, since thorough mixing and penetration are accomplished once 
combustion begins, making fine atomization unnecessary. For the same reason pintle injector nozzles are 
generally used, and these are, of course self cleaning. But pintaux nozzles have one very fine hole in 
addition to the pintle hole and this hole becomes choked with carbon very easily. 
 
 
 
 
Advantages of compression swirl combustion chamber 
a. Because of high turbulence and near perfect combustion, the odour-producing exhaust gas 
emissions are eliminated. 
b. Relatively low injection pressures can be used. 
c. Because of the high turbulence and good air-fuel mixing, the delay period is reduced and diesel 
knock is practically eliminated. 
Disadvantages of compression swirl combustion chamber 
a. Due to losses in thermal and mechanical efficiency slightly more fuel is used than in direct 
injection engines. 
b. The heat lost by the compressed air to the top of the swirl chamber is considerable causing cold 
weather starting problems. 
c. Owing to the design of the compression swirl chamber efficient scavenging of the burnt gas is a 
problem. 
 
5.4 Air cell or energy cell combustion chamber 
 
Over the years, many types of air cell have been developed, the most successful of these being the 
„Lanova‟ energy cell. The most common version of this combustion chamber consists of a cell located in 
the cylinder head directly opposite the fuel injection nozzle. The energy cell is usually a removable unit 
screwed into the head and consists of two differently sized and shaped cells in series, connected by a 
venturi choke. The cells are permanently in communication with the combustion chamber, through 
another venturi at the inner end of the inner cell. 
 
Fig.14 Air cell or Energy cell combustion chamber                                   
 
In operation beginning with the induction stroke, the air enters through the inlet valve in one of 
the two recesses and, because of its offset position with respect to the cylinder axis, is given an initial 
swirling motion. On the compression stroke, this air is compressed into the confined space of the „8‟-
shaped combustion chamber continuing the swirling motion. When the top of the compression stroke is 
approached, the air above the flat portions of the piston crown is rapidly displaced into the chamber 
recesses attaining both high velocity and high temperature. During the compression stroke a small part of 
the air is forced into the energy cell, where owing to the restricted cooling it later attains a pressure higher 
than that in the combustion chamber. This high pressure however is confined within the cell where it 
cannot cause increased stress on the working parts of the engine but where on the other hand it serves a 
definite purpose in combustion control. At the proper instant, the fuel is sprayed by the nozzle directly 
across the chamber throat, the main body of the stream entering the energy cell and those portions near 
the edges being swept around the circular recesses in opposite directions, thus accelerating the already 
swirling air therein. As the fuel reaches the energy cell it ignites instantaneously and a rapid combustion 
takes place. However since the volume of air within the cell is small only a small part of the fuel is thus 
consumed and the balance the major portion is blown violently back against the continuing stream from 
the injection nozzle. It is divided by the form of the throat into two streams of highly atomized fuel and 
hot air in the process of combustion to swirl actively in opposite directions in two recesses. In doing so 
these streams oppose the direction of rotation of the air already there so that air and fuel are most 
intimately mixed. 
 
 
 
Advantages of air cell combustion chamber 
a. There is minimal shock loading on working components due to a high degree of controlled 
combustion. 
b. A clean exhaust is possible over a fairly wide range of speeds, because the turbulence in the 
combustion chamber is induced by thermal expansion and is virtually independent of the engine 
speed. 
c. Relatively low fuel injection pressures may be used because a high degree of atomization is not 
required. 
Disadvantages of air cell combustion chamber 
a. There are starting difficulties when cold due to the high loss of compressed air heat to the very 
large combustion chamber wall area. 
b. Efficient scavenging of the energy cell is difficult to achieve. 
c. The cylinder head is expensive because of the complicated moulding and machining involved in 
its manufacturing.  
    
6. Conclusion  
The time during which the fuel vaporizes and ignites is dependent on three factors: 
i. 
The difference between the air temperature and the self-ignition temperature of the fuel. 
If the air temperature is much higher than the fuel self-ignition temperature, the fuel will 
vaporize and ignite quickly. The greater the difference, the quicker will be the vaporization, and 
the sooner ignition will occur. 
ii. 
The pressure in the combustion chamber 
The greater the pressure, the more intimate the contact between the cold fuel and the hot 
air will be. The closer the contact between these two, the greater will be the rate of heat transfer 
from one to the other, again giving more rapid vaporization and ignition. 
iii. 
The fineness of the fuel particles. 
If the fuel could be broken up into fine enough particles, the vaporization required for 
combustion would be practically negligible and ignition will start almost immediately. However, 
the mass of the fuel particles under these conditions would not be sufficient to carry the particle 
far from the injector nozzle, and complete combustion would not occur. For complete 
combustion, good depth of penetration of the fuel particles into the combustion chamber is 
necessary, and the particles must have sufficient mass to carry them deep into the compressed air. 
The study reinforcing the existence of turbulence in combustion chamber, and detailed discussion carried 
out about the vital role of turbulence to achieve proper air-fuel mixing which can leads to complete 
combustion. Various types of combustion chamber were explained with respect to improve the turbulence 
effect inside the diesel engine combustion chamber. Turbulence inducing geometrical changes and 
auxiliary chambers are analyzed, Prons and Cons are listed.    
 
References 
 
 [1] Heseding, M. and Daskalopoulos, P. (2006). Exhaust Emission Legislation-Diesel- and Gas Engines, 
VDMA, Frankfurt am Main.  
[2] J.B. Heywood, (1988) “Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals”, McGraw-Hill Book Co,.  
[3] Z. Li, M. Kokkolaras, D. Jung, Panos Y. Papalambros and D. N. Assanis, (2004), “An Optimization 
Study of Manufacturing Variation Effects on Diesel Injector Design with Emphasis on Emissions”, SAE 
International.  
[4] Zhang, L., Ueda, T. Takatsuki, T. Yokota., A study of the effects of chamber geometries on flame 
behaviour in a direct injection diesel engine. SAE Paper No. 952515. 
[5] Brandl, F., W. Reverencic, Cartellieri, J.C. Dent, Turbulent air flow in the combustion bowl of a DI 
diesel engine and its effect on engine performance. SAE Paper 790040. 
 
[6] Kondoh T., A. Fukumoto, K. Ohsawa, Y. Ohkubo, An assessment of a multidimensional numerical 
method to predict the flow in internal combustion engines. SAE Paper 850500. 
[7] Prasad, B.V.V.S.U., C.S. Sharma, T.N.C Anand, R.V. Ravikrishna, (2011) “High swirl-inducing 
piston bowls in small diesel engines for emission reduction”, Applied Energy, vol(88),p2355–2367. 
[8] S.Sunil Kumar Reddy, V. Pandurangadu, S.P.Akbar Hussain, (2013) “The Effect of Turbulence on the 
Emissions of an Insulated DI Diesel Engine With Insulted Combustion Chamber”, International Journal 
of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT) ISSN: 2249 – 8958, Volume-2, Issue-4  p.p 36-40 
[9] Somender Singh,(2001)“Design to improve turbulence in combustion chambers” US Patent 6,237,579. 
[10] Aliya Askarova, Symbat Bolegenova, Valery Maximov, Aidyn Bekmukhamet, and Meruyert 
Beketayeva, (2012)  “Influence Degree of Turbulence in the Combustion Chamber”, International Journal 
of Research in Engineering and Technology (IJRET) Vol. 1, No. 6, ISSN 2277 – 4378 
[11] Dr. Hiregoudar Yerrennagoudaru, Kullaya Swamy K B, (2014) “Effect of Turbulence and Diesel 
Swirl Injection on Engine Performance and Emissions in CI Engine”, International Journal of Engineering 
Science and Innovative Technology (IJESIT) Volume 3, Issue 4  
[12] Isaac Joshua Ramesh Lalvani J*, Jayaraj S, Parthasarathy M, Dhinesh B, and Annamalai K, (2015) 
“Pooled effect of injection pressure and turbulence inducer piston on performance, combustion and 
emission characteristics of a DI diesel engine powered with biodiesel blend”, SAE technical paper  
