Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
1 
CHAPTER 2
FOUR-STROKE CYCLE S-I ENGINE - PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION
Fig: cross section of a SI Engine 
In Four-stroke cycle engine, the cycle 
of operation is completed in four-strokes of 
the piston or two revolutions of the 
crankshaft. Each stroke consists of 180°, of 
crankshaft rotation and hence a cycle consists 
of 720°of crankshaft rotation. The series of 
operations of an ideal four-stroke. SI engine 
are as follows (see Fig.2.1 & 2.2) 
1. Suction stroke 
 Suction stroke 0-1 starts when the piston is at top dead centre and about to move downwards. The 
inlet valve is open at this time and the exhaust valve is closed. Due to the suction created by the motion of 
the piston towards bottom dead centre, the charge consisting of fresh air mixed with the fuel is drawn into 
the cylinder. At the end of the suction stroke the inlet valve closes. 
2. Compression stroke. 
The fresh charge taken into the cylinder during suction stroke is compressed by the return stroke of 
the piston 1-2. During this stroke both inlet and exhaust valves remain closed. The air which occupied the 
whole cylinder volume is now compressed into clearance volume. Just before the end of the compression 
stroke the mixture is ignited with the help of an electric spark between the electrodes of the spark plug 
located in combustion chamber wall. Burning takes place when the piston is almost at top dead centre. 
During the burning process the chemical energy of the fuel is converted into sensible energy, producing a 
temperature rise of about 2000°C, and the pressure is also considerably increased. 
3. Expansion or power stroke. 
Due to high pressure the burnt gases force the piston towards bottom dead centre, stroke 3-4, and 
both the inlet and exhaust valves remaining closed. Thus power is obtained during this stroke. Both 
pressure and temperature decrease during expansion. 
4. Exhaust stroke. 
At the end of the expansion stroke the exhaust valve opens, the inlet valve remaining closed, and 
the piston is moving from bottom dead centre to top dead centre sweeps out the burnt gases from the 
cylinder, stroke 4-0. The exhaust valve closes at the end of the exhaust stroke and some 'residual' gases 
remain in the cylinder. 
Each cylinder of a four-stroke engine completes the above four operations in two engine 
revolutions. One revolution of the crankshaft occurs during the suction and compression strokes, and 
second revolution during the power and exhaust strokes. Thus for one complete cycle, there is only one 
power stroke while the crankshaft turns by two revolutions. Most of the spark-ignition internal combustion 
engines are of the four-stroke type. They are most popular for passenger cars and small aircraft 
applications. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
2 
Fig.2.1-The four-stroke spark-ignition (SI) engine 
cycle (Otto cycle or constant volume cycle) 
 
Fig.2.2-Ideal and actual indicator diagrams for four-stroke SI engine 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
3 
Fig. 2.3 Four-stroke petrol engine valve timing diagram in relation to the pressure volume diagram 
 
Actual Valve Timing Of Four-Stroke Petrol Engine. 
Valve timing is the regulation of the points in the cycle at which the valves are set to open and 
close. As described above in the ideal cycle inlet and exhaust valves open and close at dead centres, but in 
actual cycles they open or close before or after dead centres as explained below. There are two factors, one 
mechanical and other dynamic, for the actual valve timing to be different from the theoretical valve timing. 
 
(a) Mechanical factor. 
The poppet valves of the reciprocating engines are opened and closed by cam mechanisms. The 
clearance between cam, tappet and valve must be slowly taken up and valve slowly lifted, at first, if noise 
and wear is to be avoided. For the same reasons the valve cannot be closed abruptly, else it will 'bounce' on 
its seat. (Also the cam contours should be so designed as to produce gradual and smooth changes in 
directional acceleration). Thus the valve opening and closing periods are spread over a considerable 
number of crankshaft degrees. As a result, the opening of the valve must commence ahead of the time at 
which it is fully opened (i.e., before dead centres). The same reasoning applies for the closing time and the 
valves must close after the dead centres. Fig.2.3 shows the actual valve timing diagram of a four-stroke 
engine in relation to its pressure-volume diagram. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
4 
b) Dynamic factor; 
Besides mechanical factor of opening and closing of valves, the actual valve timing is set taking 
into consideration the dynamic effects of gas flow. 
Intake valve timing.
Intake valve timing has a bearing on the actual quantity of air sucked during the suction stroke i.e. 
it affects the volumetric efficiency. Fig.2.4 shows the intake valve timing diagram for both low speed & 
high speed SI engines. 
 
Fig:2.4 Valve timing for low and high speed four-stroke SI engine 
 
It is seen that for both low speed and high speed engine the intake valve opens 100 before the 
arrival of the piston at TDC on the exhaust stroke. This is to insure that the valve will be fully open and the 
fresh charge starting to flow into the cylinder as soon as possible after TDC. As the piston moves out in the 
suction stroke, the fresh charge is drawn in through the intake port and valve. When the piston reaches the 
BDC and starts to move in the compression stroke, the inertia of the entering fresh charge tends to cause it 
to continue to move into the cylinder. To take advantage of this, the intake valve is closed after BDC so 
that maximum air is taken in. This is called ram effect. However, if the intake valve is to remain open for 
too long a time beyond BDC, the up-moving piston on the compression stroke would tend to force some of 
the charge, already in the cylinder, back into the intake manifold. The time the intake valve should remain 
open after BDC is decided by the speed of the engine. 
At low engine speed, the charge speed is low and so the air inertia is low, and hence the intake 
valve should close relatively early after BDC for a slow speed engine (say about 100 after BDC). 
In high speed engines the charge speed is high and consequently the inertia is high and hence to 
induct maximum quantity of charge due to ram effect the intake valve should close relatively late after 
BDC (up to 600 after BDC). 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
5 
For a variable speed engine the chosen intake valve setting is a compromise between the best 
setting for low and high speeds. 
There is a limit to the high speed for advantage of ram effect. At very high speeds the effect of fluid 
friction may be more than offset the advantage of ram effect and the charge for cylinder per cycle falls off. 
 
Exhaust valve timing  
The exhaust valve is set to open before BDC (say about 250 before BDC in low speed engines and 
550 before BDC in high speed engines). If the exhaust valve did not start to open until BDC, the pressures 
in the cylinder would be considerably above atmospheric pressure during the first portion of the exhaust 
stroke, increasing the work required to expel the exhaust gases. But opening the exhaust valve earlier 
reduces the pressure near the end of the power stroke and thus causes some loss of useful work on this 
stroke. However, the overall effect of opening the valve prior to the time the piston reaches BDC results in 
overall gain in output. 
The closing time of exhaust valve effects the volumetric efficiency, By closing the exhaust valve a 
few degrees after TDC (about 150 in case of low speed engines and 200 in case of high speed engines) the 
inertia of the exhaust gases tends to scavenge the cylinder by carrying out a greater mass of the gas left in 
the clearance volume. This results in increased volumetric efficiency. 
Note that there may be a period when both the intake and exhaust valves are open at the same time. This is 
called valve over-lap (say about 150 in low speed engine and 300 in high speed engines). This overlap 
should not be excessive otherwise it will allow the burned gases to be sucked into the intake manifold, or 
the fresh charge to escape through the exhaust valve. 
 
Table2.1–Typical valve timings for four-stroke SI engines  
 
Note. Valve timing is different for different makes of engines. 
b-before, 
a-after  
 
TDC-Top dead centre, 
BDC-Bottom dead centre. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
6 
FOUR-STROKE CI ENGINES- PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION 
The four-stroke CI engine is similar to four-stroke SI engine except that a high compression ratio is 
used in the former, and during the suction stroke, air alone, instead of a fuel-air mixture, is inducted. Due 
to high compression ratio, the temperature at the end of compression stroke is sufficient to ignite the fuel 
which is injected into the combustion chamber. 
In the CI engine a high pressure fuel pump and an injector is provided to inject fuel into 
combustion chamber. 
The carburettor and ignition system, necessary in the SI engine, are not required in the CI engine. 
The ideal sequence of operation for the four-stroke CI engine is as follows: 
 
Fig.2.5 Ideal P-V Diagram  
 
 
 
Fig.2.6 Cycle of Operation 
1.Suction stroke 
Only air is inducted during the suction stroke. During this stroke intake valve is open and exhaust 
valve is closed. 
2.Compression stroke 
Both valves remain closed during compression stroke. 
3. Expansion or power stroke 
Fuel is injected in the beginning of the expansion .stroke. The rate of injection is such that the 
combustion maintains the pressure constant. After the injection of fuel is over (i.e. after fuel cut off) the 
products of combustion expand. Both valves remain closed during expansion stroke. 
4. Exhaust stroke.
The exhaust valve is open and the intake valve remains closed in the exhaust stroke. 
Due to higher pressures the CI engine is heavier than SI engine but has a higher thermal efficiency because 
of greater expansion. CI engines are mainly used for heavy transport vehicles, power generation, and 
industrial and marine applications. 
The typical valve timing diagram for a four-stroke CI 
engine is as follows 
 
IVO 
about 300 before TDC 
 
IVO 
up to 500 after BDC 
 
EVO about 450 before BDC 
 
EVO up to 300 after TDC 
Injection about 150 before TDC 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
7 
TWO-STROKE CYCLE ENGINE-PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION 
In two-stroke engines the cycle is completed in two strokes, i.e., one revolution of the crankshaft as 
against two revolutions of four-stroke cycle. The difference between two-stroke and four-stroke engines is 
in the method of filling the cylinder with the fresh charge and removing the burned gases from the 
cylinder. In a four-stroke engine the operations are performed by the engine piston during the suction and 
exhaust strokes, respectively. In a two stroke engine suction is accomplished by air compressed in 
crankcase or by a blower. The induction of compressed air removes the products of combustion, through 
exhaust ports. Therefore no piston strokes are required for suction and exhaust operations. Only two piston 
strokes are required to complete the cycle, one for compressing the fresh charge and the other for 
expansion or power stroke.
Types of two stroke engines 
•
Based on scavenging method 
i)Crankcase & ii) Separately scavenged engine 
•
Based on scavenging process (air flow) 
i)Cross flow scavenging, 
ii)Loop scavenging (MAN, Schnuerle, Curtis type) 
iii)Uni-flow scavenging (opposed piston, poppet valve, sleeve valve) 
•
Based on overall port-timing 
i) Symmetrical & ii) Unsymmetrical scavenging 
 
Crankcase-scavenged two-stroke engine 
Figure 2.7 shows the simplest type of two-stroke engine – the crankcase scavenged engine. Fig.2.8 
shows its ideal and actual indicator diagrams. Fig.2.9 shows the typical valve timing diagram of a two-
stroke engine. The air or charge is sucked through spring-loaded inlet valve when the pressure in the 
crankcase reduces due to upward motion of the piston during compression stroke. After the compression, 
ignition and expansion takes place in the usual way: During the expansion stroke the air in the crankcase is 
compressed. Near the end of expansion stroke piston uncovers the exhaust port, and the cylinder pressure 
drops to atmospheric as the combustion products leave the cylinder. Further motion of the piston uncovers 
transfer ports, permitting the slightly compressed air or mixture in the crankcase to enter the engine 
cylinder. The top of the piston sometimes has a projection to deflect the fresh air to sweep up to the top of 
the cylinder before flowing to the exhaust ports. This serves the double purpose of scavenging the upper 
part of the cylinder of combustion products and preventing the fresh charge from .flowing directly to the 
exhaust ports. The same objective can be achieved without piston deflector by proper shaping of the 
transfer port. During the upward motion of the piston from bottom dead centre, the transfer ports and then 
the exhaust port close and compression of the charge begins and the cycle is repeated. 
 
Fig.2.7-Crankcase-scavenged 
two-stroke engine 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
8 
Fig. 2.8  Ideal and actual 
indicator diagrams for a two-
stroke SI engine 
 
Fig.2.9. 
Typical 
valve 
timing diagram of a two-
stroke engine 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
9 
Separately scavenged engine 
 
In the loop-scavenged engine (Fig. 2.10) an external blower is used to supply the charge, under 
some pressure, at the inlet manifold. During the downward stroke of the piston exhaust ports are uncovered 
at about 65° before bottom dead 
centre. At about 100 later the inlet 
ports open and the scavenging 
process takes place. 
The inlet ports are shaped 
so that most of the air flows to the 
top of the cylinder for proper 
scavenging of the upper part of the 
cylinder. Piston deflectors are not 
used as they are heavy and tend to 
become overheated at high output. 
The 
scavenging 
process 
is 
moreefficient in properly designed 
loop-scavenged engine than in the 
usual 
crank-case 
compression 
engine with deflector piston. 
Fig.2.10. Loop-scavenged two-stroke engine (separately scavenged engine) 
Opposed piston or end to end scavenged engine (uniflow scavenged) two stroke engine.
In this type of engine the exhaust 
ports or exhaust valves are opened first. The 
inlet ports give swirl to incoming air which 
prevents mixing of fresh charge and 
combustion products during the scavenging 
process. Early on the compression stroke the 
exhaust ports close. In loop scavenged 
engine the port timing is symmetrical, so the 
exhaust port must close after the inlet port 
closes. These timings prevent this type of 
engine from filling its cylinder at full inlet 
pressure. In the end-to-end scavenged 
engines counter flow within the cylinder is 
eliminated, and there is less opportunity for 
mixing of fresh charge and burnt gases. The 
scavenging should therefore be more 
efficient. 
 
Fig. 2.11. 'End to end' scavenged or uniflow two-
stroke engine 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
10 
Valvetiming for two-stroke engines 
Fig. 2.12(a), (b) and (c) show typical valve timing diagram for a crankcase-scavenged two-stroke 
engine and supercharged two-stroke engine and a four-stroke engine, respectively. 
 
Fig 2.12 
 
In case of two-stroke engine the exhaust port is opened near the end of the expansion stroke. With 
piston-controlled exhaust and inlet port arrangement the lower part of the piston stroke is always wasted so 
as far as the useful power output is concerned; about 15% to 40% of the expansion stroke is ineffective. 
The actual percentage varies with different designs. This early opening of the exhaust ports during the last 
part of the expansion stroke is necessary to permit blow down of the exhaust gases and, also to reduce the 
cylinder pressure so that when the inlet port opens at the end of the blow down process, fresh charge can 
enter the cylinder. The fresh charge, which comes from the crankcase for scavenging pump, enters the 
cylinder at a pressure slightly higher than the atmospheric pressure. Some of the fresh charge is lost due to 
short-circuiting. For petrol engine this means a loss of fuel and high unburnt hydrocarbons in the exhaust. 
By comparing the valve timing of two stroke and four-stroke engines, (Fig. 2.12), it is clear that the time 
available for scavenging and charging of the cylinder of a two stroke engine is almost one-third that 
available for the .four-stroke engine. For a crankcase-scavenged engine the inlet port closes before the 
exhaust port whilst for a supercharged engine the inlet port closes after the exhaust port [Fig. 2.12 (b)]. 
Such timing allows more time for filling the cylinder. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
11 
Scavenging process 
 
At the end of the expansion stroke, the combustion chambers of a two-stroke engine is left full of 
products of combustion. This is because, unlike four-stroke engines, there is no exhaust stroke available to 
clear the cylinder of burnt gases. The process of clearing the cylinder of burned gases and filling it with 
fresh mixture (or air}-the combined intake and exhaust process is called scavenging process. This must be 
completed in a very short duration available between the end of the expansion stroke and start of the 
charging process. 
 
The efficiency of a two-stroke engine depends to a great degree on the effectiveness of the 
scavenging process, since bad scavenging gives a low mean indicated pressure and hence, results in a high 
weight and high cost per bhp for the engine. With insufficient scavenging the amount of oxygen available 
is low so that the consequent incomplete combustion results in higher specific fuel consumption. Not only 
that, the lubricating oil becomes more contaminated, so that its lubricating qualities are reduced and results 
in increased wear of piston and cylinder liners. Poor scavenging also leads to higher mean temperatures 
and greater heat stresses on the cylinder walls. 
 
Thus it goes without saying that every improvement in the scavenging leads to improvement in 
engine and its efficiency in several directions and hence, a detailed study of scavenging process and 
different scavenging systems is worthwhile. 
 
The scavenging process is the replacement of the products of combustion in the cylinder from the previous 
power stroke with fresh-air charge to be burned in the next cycle. In the absence of an exhaust stroke in 
every revolution of the crankshaft, this gas exchange process for a two-stroke engine must take place in its 
entirety at the lower portion of the piston travel. Obviously, it cannot occur instantaneously at bottom dead 
centre. Therefore, a portion of both the expansion stroke and the compression stroke is utilized for cylinder 
blow-down and recharging. 
 
The scavenging process can be divided into four distinct periods 
Fig. 2.13 show the pressure recordings inside the cylinder for a Flat 782 S engine. When the inlet 
port opens the gases expanding in the main cylinder tend to escape from it and to pre-discharge into the 
scavenge air manifold. This process, called pre-blowdown, ends when the exhaust port opens. As soon as 
the exhaust ports are open, the gases existing in the cylinder at the end of expansion stroke discharge 
spontaneously into the exhaust manifold and the pressure of the main cylinder drops to a value lower than 
that existing in the scavenge air manifold. This process, called blowdown, terminates at the moment the 
gas pressure inside the cylinder attains a value slightly lower than the air-pressure inside the scavenge 
manifold. During the third phase, called scavenging, which starts at the moment the spontaneous exhaust 
gases from the cylinder terminates and ends at the moment the exhaust ports are closed; the scavenge air 
sweeps out all residual gases remaining in the main cylinder at the end of the spontaneous exhaust and 
replaces them as completely as possible with fresh charge. After scavenging is complete the fresh charge 
continues to flow till the scavenge ports are open and the pressure in the cylinder rises. This results in 
better filling of the cylinder. This last part of the scavenging process is called additional-charging.
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
12 
Fig. 2.13 Fiat 782 S engine standard scavenging & typical valve timing diagram of a two-stroke engine 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
13 
Fig.2.14shows, a typical pressure-volume diagram 
for a two-stroke engine. In this diagram the total 
piston stroke has been divided into power stroke 
and scavenging stroke (This division is arbitrary). 
The area of the p-v diagram for the power stroke 
depends very much on the scavenging efficiency. 
With proper scavenging efficiency the pressure 
rise due to combustion is lower and hence this 
area is smaller and lower thermal efficiency is 
obtained. 
 
Fig. 2.14 Typical pressure-volume for a two-stroke 
engine. 
 
Theoretical scavenging processes 
 
Fig. 
2.15 
Three 
theoretical 
scavenging 
processes. 
 
Fig.2.15 illustrates three theoretical 
scavenging processes. They are 
Perfect scavenging, 
Perfect mixing and 
Complete shortcircuiting.
{
The delivery ratio 
mass
reference
cycle
per 
 
mixture)
(or 
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
del
R
, compares the actual 
scavenging air mass (or mixture mass) to that required in an ideal charging process.
(If scavenging is done with fuel-air mixture, as in spark-ignition engines, then mixture mass is used instead 
of air mass.) 
The reference mass is defined as displaced volume × ambient air (or mixture) density. 
Ambient air (or mixture) density is determined at atmospheric conditions or at intake conditions. 
This definition is useful for experimental purposes. For analytical work, it is often convenient to use the 
trapped cylinder mass mtr as the reference mass. 
OR in other words the delivery ratio is a measure to 
the air (mixture) supplied to the cylinder relative to the cylinder content.
If Rdel = 1, it means that the volume of the scavenging air supplied to the cylinder is equal to the 
cylinder volume (or displacement volume whichever is taken as reference). 
Delivery ratio usually varies between 1.2 to 1.5, except for closed crankcase-scavenged, where it is 
less than unity. 
The scavenging efficiency 
charge
cylinder 
 
trapped
of
mass
retained
 
mixture)
(or
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
sc
η
,
indicates to what extent the residual gases in the cylinder have been replaced with fresh air.
If
1
=
sc
η
, it means that all gases existing in the cylinder at the beginning of scavenging have been 
swept out completely.} 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
14 
(I)Perfect scavenging. 
Ideally, the fresh fuel-air mixture should remain separated from the residual combustion products with 
respect to both mass and heat transfer during the scavenging process. Fresh air pumped into the cylinder 
by the blower through the inlet ports at the lower end of the cylinder pushes the products of combustion 
ahead of itself and of the cylinder through the exhaust valve at the other end. There is no mixing of air and 
products. As long as any products remain in the cylinder the flow through the exhaust valves consists of 
products only. However, as soon as sufficient fresh .air has entered to fill the entire cylinder volume 
(displacement plus clearance volume) the flow abruptly changes from one of products to one of air. This 
ideal process would represent perfect scavenging with no short -circuiting loss. 
 
(ii) Perfect mixing. 
The second theoretical scavenging process is perfect mixing, in which the incoming fresh charge mixes 
completely and instantaneously with the cylinder contents, and a portion of this mixture passes out of the 
exhaust ports at a rate equal to that entering the cylinder. This homogeneous mixture consists initially of 
products of combustion only and then gradually changes to pure air. This mixture flowing through the 
exhaust ports is identical with that momentarily existing in the cylinder and changes with it. For the case of 
perfect mixing the scavenging efficiency can be represented by the following equation:  
del
R
sc
e−
−
= 1
η
,
where 
sc
η and Rdel are scavenging efficiency and delivery ratio respectively. 
This is plotted in Fig. 2.15. The result of this theoretical process closely approximates the results of many 
actual scavenging processes, and is thus often used as a basis of comparison. 
 
(iii)Short-circuiting. 
The third type of scavenging process is that of short-circuiting in which the fresh charge coming from the 
scavenge manifold directly goes out of the exhaust ports without removing any residual gas. This is a dead 
loss and its occurrence must be avoided. 
The actual scavenging process is neither one of perfect scavenging nor perfect mixing. It probably consists 
partially of perfect scavenging, mixing and short-circuiting. 
Fig. 2.16shows the delivery ratio and trapping efficiency variation with crankangle for three different 
scavenging modes., i.e.,perfect scavenging (displacement), perfect mixing and intermediate scavenging. 
Fig. 2.17shows the scavenging parameters for the intermediate scavenging. This represents the actual 
scavenging process. It can be seen from this Fig. that a certain amount of combustion products is initially 
pushed out of the cylinder without being diluted by fresh air. Gradually, mixing 
and short circuiting causes the out flowing products to be diluted by more and more fresh air until 
ultimately the situation is the same as for perfect mixing, i.e., the first phase of the scavenging process is a 
perfect scavenging process which then gradually changes into a complete mixing process.
Fig,2.16 Delivery ratio and efficiency variation with 
 
` Fig. 2.17 Scavenging parameters for  
crankcase for three different scavenging modes.   
 
intermediate scavenging 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
15 
Scavenging parameters .. 
The delivery ratio - The delivery ratio represents the ratio of the air volume, under the ambient 
conditions of the scavenge manifold, introduced per cycle and a reference volume. This reference volume 
has been variously chosen to be displacement volume, effective displacement volume, total cylinder 
volume or total effective cylinder volume. Since it is only the quantity or charge in the remaining total 
cylinder volume at exhaust port closure that enters into the combustion, the total effective cylinder volume 
should be preferred. The delivery ratio is mass of fresh air delivered to the cylinder divided by a reference 
mass, 
i.e.,
mass
reference
cycle
per 
 
mixture)
(or 
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
del
R
,
The delivery ratio compares the actual scavenging air mass (or mixture mass) to that required in an 
ideal charging process. OR The delivery ratio is a measure to the air (mixture) supplied to the cylinder 
relative to the cylinder content.
If Rdel = 1, it means that the volume of the scavenging air supplied to the cylinder is equal to the 
cylinder volume (or displacement volume whichever is taken as reference). 
Delivery ratio usually varies between 1.2 to 1.5, except for closed crankcase-scavenged, where it is 
less than unity. 
(If scavenging is done with fuel-air mixture, as in spark-ignition engines, then mixture mass is used 
instead of air mass.) The reference mass is defined as displaced volume × ambient air (or mixture) density. 
Ambient air (or mixture) density is determined at atmospheric conditions or at intake conditions. 
This definition is useful for experimental purposes. For analytical work, it is often convenient to use the 
trapped cylinder mass mtr as the reference mass. 
The trapping efficiency - The amount of fresh charge retained in the cylinder is not same as that 
supplied to the cylinder because some fresh charge is always lost due to short-circuiting. Therefore, an 
additional term, trapping efficiency, is used to indicate the ability of the cylinder to retain the fresh charge. 
It is defined as the ratio of the amount of charge retained in the cylinder to the total charge delivered to the 
engine, i.e., 
(mixture)
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
retained
 
mixture)
(or
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
tr
η
Trapping efficiency indicates what fraction of the air (or mixture) supplied to the cylinder is 
retained in the cylinder.. This is mainly controlled by the geometry of the ports and the overlap time. 
 
The scavenging efficiency 
Scavenging efficiency is the ratio of the mass of scavenge air 
which remains in the cylinder at the end of the scavenging to the mass of the cylinder itself at the moment 
when the scavenge and exhaust ports of valves are fully closed. It is given by 
 
charge
cylinder 
 
trapped
of
mass
retained
 
mixture)
(or
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
sc
η
,
indicates to what extent the residual gases in the cylinder have been replaced with fresh air.
If 
1
=
sc
η
, it means that all gases existing in the cylinder at the beginning of scavenging have been 
swept out completely. 
The purity of the charge:
charge
cylinder 
 
trapped
of
mass
charge
cylinder 
 
in trapped
air 
 
of
mass
purity =
, indicates the 
degree of dilution, with burned gases, of the unburned mixture in the cylinder. 
The charging efficiency 
density
ambient 
 x
volume
displaced
retained
 
mixture)
(or
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
sc
η
,
indicates 
how effectively the cylinder volume has been filled with fresh air (or mixture) 
Relative cylinder charge.- The air or mixture retained, together with the residual gas, remaining in 
the cylinder after flushing out the products of combustion constitutes the cylinder charge. Relative cylinder 
charge is a measure of the success of filling cylinder irrespective of the composition of charge. The relative 
cylinder charge may be either more or less than unity depending upon the scavenging pressure and port 
heights. 
Excess air factor,λ - The value (Rdel-1) is called the excess air factor. If the delivery ratio is 1.4, 
the excess air factor is 0.4. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
16 
Classification based on scavenging process 
The simplest method of introducing the charge into the cylinder is to employ crankcase 
compression as shown in Fig.2.7. This type of engine is classified as the crankcase scavenged engine. 
In another type, a separate blower or a pump (Fig.2.8) may be used to introduce the charge through the 
inlet port. They are classified as the separately scavenged engines. 
 
Fig.2.16 Methods of Scavenging  (a)Cross Scavenging  
 
 
(b) Loop Scavenging, M.A.N. Type 
(c)Loop Scavenging Schnuerle Type, 
(d) Loop Scavenging, Curtis Type 
Another classification of two-stroke cycle engines is based on the air flow. 
Based on a transversal air stream, the most common arrangement is cross scavenging, illustrated in 
Fig.2.16 (a). Most small engines are cross-scavenged. The cross scavenging system employs inlet and 
exhaust ports placed in opposite sides of the cylinder wall. The incoming air is directed upward, to 
combustion chamber on one side of the cylinder and then down on the other side to force out the exhaust 
gases through the oppositely located exhaust ports. This requires that the air should be guided by use of 
either a suitably shaped deflector formed on piston top or by use of inclined ports. With this arrangement 
the engine is structurally simpler than that with the uniflow scavenging, due to absence of valves, 
distributors, and relative drive devices. The inlet and exhaust of gases is exclusively controlled by the 
.opening and closure of ports by piston motion. The main disadvantage of this system is that the 
scavenging air is not able to get rid of the layer of exhaust gas near the wall resulting in poor scavenging. 
Some of the fresh charge also goes directly into the exhaust port. The result of these factors is poor bmep 
of cross-scavenged engines.  
Based on a transversal air stream, with loop or reverse scavenging, the fresh air first sweeps across 
the piston top, moves up and then down and finally out through the exhaust. Loop or reverse scavenging 
avoids the short -circuiting of the cross-scavenged engine and thus improves upon its scavenging 
efficiency. The inlet and exhaust ports are placed on the same side of the cylinder wall. 
In the M.A.N. type of loop scavenge, Fig.2.16(b), the exhaust and inlet ports are on the same side, the 
exhaust above the inlet. 
In the Schnuerle type, Fig.2.16(c), the ports are side by side. the inlet ports are placed on both sides 
of the exhaust ports so that the incoming air enters in two streams uniting on the cylinder wall opposite the 
exhaust ports, flows upwards, turns under the cylinder head, then flows downwards the other side to the 
exhaust ports. Such a system of air deflection reduces the possibilities of short-circuiting to minimum. 
With this system flat-top pistons without deflectors are used. The speed of loop or reversed scavenged 
engine is not restricted by mechanical limitations because valves are not used, the charging process being 
controlled by the piston only. The speed can thus, exceed that of valve controlled two-stroke engines. 
Owing to the absence of cams, valves and valve gear, engines are simple and sturdy. They have a high 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
17 
resistance to thermal stresses and are, thus, well suited to higher supercharge. The major mechanical 
problem with a loop scavenged two-stroke engine is that of obtaining an adequate oil supply to the cylinder 
wall consistent with reasonable lubricating oil consumption and cylinder wear. This difficulty arises 
because when the piston is at top dead centre there is only a very narrow sealing belt available to prevent 
leakage of oil from crankcase into the exhaust ports. Since for loop scavenging greater cylinder distance is 
necessary to accommodate scavenge-air passage between the cylinder, a strong connecting rod and 
crankshaft need for supercharged engine can be used. 
The Curtis type of scavenging, Fig.2.16(d), is similar to the Schnuerle type, except that upwardly 
directed inlet ports are placed also opposite the exhaust ports. 
The most perfect method of scavenging is the uniflow method, based on a unidirectional air stream. 
The fresh air charge is admitted at one end of the cylinder and the exhaust escapes at the other end flowing 
through according to parallel flow lines normally having a slight rotation to stabilize the vertical motion. 
Air acts like an ideal piston and pushed on the residual gas in the cylinder after the blowdown period and 
replaces it at least in principle, throughout the cylinder.  The air flow is from end to end, and little short-
circuiting between the intake and exhaust openings is possible. Due to absence, at least in theory, of any 
eddies or turbulence it is easier in a uniflow scavenging system to push the products of combustion out of 
the cylinder without mixing with it and short circuiting. Thus, the uniflow system has highest scavenging 
efficiency. Construction simplicity is, however, sacrificed because this system requires either opposed 
pistons, poppet valves or sleeve valve all of which increases the complication. 
The three available arrangements for uniflow scavenging are shown in Fig.2.17 A poppet valve is 
used in (a) to admit the inlet air or for the exhaust, as the Case may be. In (b) the inlet and exhaust ports are 
both controlled by separate pistons that move in opposite directions. In (c) the inlet and exhaust ports are 
controlled by the combined motion of piston and sleeve. In an alternative arrangement one set of ports is 
controlled by the piston and the other set by a sleeve or slide valve. All uniflow systems permit 
unsymmetrical scavenging and supercharging. 
 
Fig.2.17 Uniflow Scavenging  
(a) Poppet Valve 
(b) Opposed Piston 
(c) Sleeve Valve 
 
Reverse flow scavenging is shown in Fig.2.17 In this type the 
inclined ports are used and the scavenging air is forced on to the opposite 
wall of the cylinder where it is reversed to the outlet ports. One obvious 
disadvantage of this type is the limitation on the port area. For long stroke 
engines operating at low piston speeds, this arrangement has proved 
satisfactory. 
 
Fig2.17 Reverse Flow Scavenging 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
18 
An interesting comparison of the merits 
of two cycle engine air scavenging methods is 
illustrated in Fig.2.18. In fact, specific output of 
the engine is largely determined by the efficiency 
of the scavenging system-and is directly related 
to the brake mean effective pressure. As shown 
in Fig.2.18 scavenging efficiency varies with the 
delivery ratio and the type of scavenging. In this 
respect cross scavenging is least efficient and 
gives the lowest brake mean effective pressure. 
The main reason for this is that the scavenging 
air flows through the cylinder but does not expel 
the exhaust residual gases effectively. Loop 
scavenging method is better than the cross 
scavenging method. Even with a delivery ratio of 
1.0 in all cases the scavenging efficiencies are 
about 53, 67 and 80 per cent for cross 
scavenging, 
loop 
scavenging 
and 
uniflow 
scavenging systems with corresponding values of 
bmep as 3.5,4.5 and 5.8 bar. 
 
Fig.2.18 Scavenging Efficiency 
 
Comparison of different scavengingsystems 
Fig.2.19 compares the scavenging efficiencies of three different types of scavenging system. 
The cross-scavenging system employs inlet and exhaust ports placed in opposite sides of the cylinder wall. 
In the loop scavenging system, inlet and exhaust ports are in the same side of the cylinder wall and in 
uniflow scavenging system, the inlet and exhaust port are at opposite ends of the cylinder. 
It can be seen that uniflow scavenging gives by far the best scavenging, that loop scavenging is good, and 
that in .general, cross-scavenging is the worst. 
The scavenging curve for the uniflow scavenging is very near to that of perfect scavenging that for 
loop scavenging is near the perfect mixing. With good loop scavenging the scavenging curve is generally 
above the perfect mixing curve and that of cross-scavenging engines it is, generally, below the perfect 
mixing curve. 
Table 2.2 compares the port areas available for different scavenging systems. Largest flow areas are 
available with uniflow system. In such a case the whole circumference of cylinder wall is available and the 
inlet port area can be as high as 35 per cent of the piston area. Due to the use of exhaust valve the exhaust 
flow area is small - about 18 per cent. In cross-scavenging the size of the inlet and exhaust ports is limited 
to about 25 and 18 per cent of piston area respectively because the ports are located on the opposite sides 
of cylinder wall. Schurnle type of loop scavenging requires that both the ports must be located within about 
three-quarters of the cylinder circumference. This limits the size of inlet and exhaust ports to about 18 and 
14 per cent of piston area only. The data for a typical four-stroke engine are also given for comparison. 
However, while comparing with the four-stroke engine it must be kept in mind that though the flow area is 
small, the time available for flow is almost three times more than that available for the two-stroke engine. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
19 
Fig. 2.19 scavenging efficiency, versus delivery ratio of different scavenging system. 
 
Table 2.2 Typical values for areas for different scavenging systems 
 
Loop or cross-scavenged engines with their inlet ports limited half of the cylinder circumference 
fall in low speed category. Uniflow scavenged engines with adequate air inlet port are and limited exhaust 
port areas fall in medium speed category, whilst the opposed piston engine takes on to high speeds because 
of its high rate of exhaust port opening, freedom from valve gear speed limits, good scavenging and perfect 
balancing. Un-supercharged uniflow engine has a considerable higher mean effective pressure than the 
loop-scavenged engine. There is more freedom in design of combustion chamber for loop scavenging. This 
results in low fuel consumption and the engine is simple to make and easy to produce. Table 2.3 compares 
the typical bmep values obtainable with different types of scavenging systems. The output of both uniflow 
and loop scavenged engines is limited 'by the thermal stresses imposed. But the loop scavenged engine due 
to its simple cylinder head can better withstand the thermal stresses. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
20 
Table 2.3 Typicalvaluesof bmep for the C.I. two-stroke oil engines 
 
Table 2.4compares the representative port timings for different types of two-stroke engines. 
 
Table 2.4. Port timings for different two-stroke engines 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
21 
Port design 
 
The Design of the inlet and exhaust ports for two stroke engines depends on various parameters.  Some 
of the important basic parameters are;  
a) Scavenging method 
b) Shape, inclination & width of ports 
c) Amount of air/charge delivered 
d) Scavenging pressure 
e) Mean inlet velocity –fn. Of pr. Ratio, temp. of scavenging & scavenging factor 
f) Duration(crank angle) of port opening & average port height uncovered by piston 
Blowdown time area (for exhaust)–[which is a fn. of temperature of exhaust Gas, expansion end 
volume(fn. of displacement volume), exhaust Gas pr., scavenging pr., & indicated mean effective 
pressure] 
g) Inlet duration, exhaust lead* & hence exhaust duration 
h) Number of ports & height of ports 
*during exhaust Lead, only exhaust port is kept open, & during super charging only inlet port is kept open. 
•
THE DIFFERENT SCAVENGING METHODS ARE AS FOLLOWS 
 

BASED ONSCAVENGING PROCESS( AIR FLOW ) 
 
I. CROSS FLOW 
-for low power o/p engines eg. Two wheelers, 
Simple, but more short circuiting, hence more charge loss, super charging is 
not possible.  It is found that port position is limited with in 50% of 
circumference. 
 
II. LOOP FLOW  
-for medium o/p engines. 
Air takes loop, less short circuiting, hence less charge loss 
A. MAN type 
-intake & exh. ports positioned one below the other. -Good 
B. SCHNURLE type-intake & exh. ports positioned side by side. 
-Better 
C. CURTIS type 
-intake on one side & exhaust on the other side. 
-Best 
 
III. UNIFLOW 
(BEST) 
–for very High o/p engines 
Ex. large power marine engines, locomotive engines etc 
As intake port is on one side & exhaust port on the other side. & the flow is 
uni-directional, ports can be wider. Residual gases are low. Ports can be 
located all around the circumference. Opposed piston engines also use this 
type. Ports with poppet valves & Sleeve valves have been used. 
 

BASED ONSCAVENGING METHOD 
 
I.CRANKCASE SCAVENGED ENGINE (crank case compression) 
-petroil lubrication is adopted. Hence lubricating oil is also burnt. So 
pollution is more. Compression is bad, more petrol consumption, and more 
residual gases. Generally used along with symmetrically scavenged engine, 
but lower delivery ratio (generally 0.7), Simple and suitable for small 
engines. Suitable for low o/p engines (5-20bhp) 
 
II.SEPARATE BLOWER / PUMP SCAVENGED ENGINE 
-higher scavenging pressure & delivery ratio is possible. Residual gases are 
low. Used in bulky arrangements i.e. above 100 hp engines 
A comparison
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
22 

BASED ON OVERALL PORT TIMING 
 
I.SYMMETRICAL PORT TIMING 
 
- 
EPO-IPO-IPC-EPC 
-Opening and closing of the ports by the piston is symmetrical. 
Advantage-arrangement of the mechanism is very simple. 
Disadvantage- more short circuiting, hence more charge loss, super charging 
is not possible. Suitable for low power o/p engines up to 5bhp i.e. scooters / 
moped engines. 
 
II.UN-SYMMETRICAL PORT TIMING  
- 
EPO-IPO-EPC-IPC 
-Opening and closing of the ports by the piston is un-symmetrical. 
Mechanism is complex.  
Advantages- super charging is possible - by the following ways 
 
Supercharging valve-rotary valves, 
Poppet valves by suitably designing the cam mechanism, 
Using sleeve /slide valve, but it is mechanically complicated, 
& using opposed piston 
 
•
The common different Shapes of ports are as follows
Rectangular 
-BEST 
 
With rounded corners, which gives maximum flow area & smooth edges reduce friction 
 
&
Rhomboidal & Oblong -good w.r.to ring entrance avoidance 
 
Circular-only some applications (only for intake) 
 
Inclination
-is given for better mixing, scavenging, turbulence, swirl and combustion. 
Width 
-for Uniflow scavenging 
-0.6πD (entire circumference available for porting 
 
-for lLoop scavenging  
-0.2πD (both ports are on same side of the wall) 
-for Crossflow scavenging 
-0.3πD (50% of circumference is available for porting) 
Ports should be sufficiently wider for max. flow area, But should not create problem of piston ring entrance 
into it.  
 
•
Amount of air/charge delivered
The delivery ratio is a measure of the air (mixture) supplied to the cylinder relative to the cylinder content. 
The delivery ratio 
mass
reference
cycle
per 
 
mixture)
(or 
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
del
R
,
If Rdel = 1, it means that the volume of the scavenging air supplied to the cylinder is equal to the cylinder 
volume (or displacement volume whichever is taken as reference). 
Delivery ratio usually varies between 1.2 to 1.5, except for closed crankcase-scavenged, where it is less 
than unity. 
Rdel = 0.7 to 0.8 – for crank case scavenging 
Rdel = 1.4 –normal value 
Rdel = 1.3 –for fuel economy 
Rdel = 1.5 –for high o/p 
For separately scavenged engines 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
23 
The scavenging efficiency 
 
charge
cylinder 
 
trapped
of
mass
retained
 
mixture)
(or
air 
 
delivered
 
of
mass
=
sc
η
,
Indicates to what extent the residual gases in the cylinder have been replaced with fresh air. 
If
1
=
sc
η
, i.e. all gases existing in the cylinder at the beginning of scavenging have been swept out 
completely} 
 
•
Scavenging pressure
Proper scavenging pressures to be adopted for the respective scavenging method 
 
•
Mean inlet velocity
Mean inlet velocity to be calculated, which is a function of pressure ratio, temp. of scavenging & 
scavenging factor. 
 
•
Duration(crank angle) of port opening & average port height uncovered by piston
With Duration (crank angle) of port opening, average port height & port timing can be calculated. 
 
•
Number of ports & height of ports.
No. of ports are selected to ensure enough (max.) width, with sufficient bridge to sustain mechanical and 
thermal load & to avoid piston ring failure i.e. entering in port area. After selecting no. of ports, width of 
the ports may be calculated and adopted. The height of ports is a major factor in timing of ports. 
 
The flow of gases through a two-stroke cycle engine is diagrammatically represented in fig. The 
hatched areas represent fresh air or mixture and the cross hatched areas represent combustion gases. The 
width of the channels represents the quantity of the gases expressed by volume at NTP condition. 
 
Fig. Scavenging Diagram for Two-stroke Cycle SI Engine 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
24 
Scavenging pumps 
 
Since the pumping action is not carried out by the piston of a two-stroke engine, a separate 
pumping mechanism, called the scavenging pump, is required to supply scavenging air to the cylinder. 
Different types of scavenging pumps used range from crankcase compression, piston type blowers to roots 
blower. The design of a two-stroke engine is significantly affected by the type of scavenging pump used; 
hence a careful selection of the scavenging pump is a pre-condition to good performance.  
Crankcase Scavenging. The most obvious and cheapest in initial cost is the use of crankcase for 
compressing the incoming air and then transferring it to the cylinder through a transfer port. Fig.2.20 
shows such a system. This system is, however, very uneconomical and inefficient in operation. This is 
because the amount of air which can be used for scavenging is less than the swept volume of the cylinder 
due to low volumetric efficiency of the crankcase which contains a large dead space. Thus, the delivery 
ratio of a crankcase scavenged engine is 
always less than unity. 
Since the delivery ratio is less than unity it 
is not possible to scavenge the cylinder 
completely of the products of combustion 
and some residual gases always remain in 
the cylinder. This results in low mean 
effective pressure for the crankcase 
scavenged engine. Typical values are 3 to 
4 bar. The output of the engine is strictly 
limited because the amount of the charge 
transferred through the transfer port is only 
40-50% of the cylinder volume. 
 
(a) two ports  
(b) three ports 
Fig. 2.20 Two-stoke crankcase scavenged engines 
A further disadvantage is that the oil vapors from the crankcase mixes with the scavenging air. This 
results in high oil consumption. Because of these disadvantages the crankcase scavenging is not preferred 
and for high output two-stroke engines a scavenging pump is a must. 
Piston, Roots, and Centrifugal blowers 
Piston type blowers as shown in Fig.2.21(a) are used only for low speed and single or two cylinder 
engines. For all other type of engines either roots or centrifugal blowers are used. The roots blower is 
preferred for small and medium output engines. While the centrifugal blower, is preferred for large and 
high output engines. From Fig. 2.22 it is clear that the centrifugal blower has a relatively flat characteristic 
curve compared to the steep characteristic curve of the 'roots blower. An increase in the flow-resistance 
due to deposits, etc., thus, has a much greater effect on the scavenging air; output of a centrifugal blower 
than on that of a roots blower. If deposits accumulate, an engine having a centrifugal blower will start 
smoking earlier than that having a roots blower. Therefore, roots blower is preferred due to its lower 
sensitivity to flow resistance changes for systems where space for exhaust ports is limited. 
The control of air delivery of centrifugal blowers can be done by throttling the air on the intake side. This, 
however, would not reduce the scavenging power required by the centrifugal blower. In the roots blower 
the air delivery is controlled by a throttle-actuated by-pass valve between blower inlet and outlet. Such a 
control divides the air-flow into two parts and only half the flow passes through the engine. This saves a 
substantial amount of scavenging power and hence results in lower specific fuel consumption. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
25 
Fig. 2.21 Scavenging-pump types. 
 
Fig. 2.22 Pressure characteristics of centrifugal and roots blower. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
26 
Comparison of two-stroke SI and CI engines 
 
The two-stroke SI engine suffers from two big disadvantages-fuel loss and idling difficulty. The 
two-stroke CI engine does not suffer from these disadvantages and hence CI engine is more suitable for 
two-stroke operation.  
If the fuel is supplied to the cylinders after the exhaust ports are closed, there will be no loss of fuel 
and the indicated thermal efficiency of the two-stroke engine will be as good as that of four-stroke engine. 
However, in an SI engine using carburettor, the scavenging is done with fuel-air mixture and only the fuel 
mixed with the retained air is used for combustion. To avoid the fuel loss instead of carburettor fuel 
injection just before the exhaust port closure may be used. 
The two-stroke SI engine runs irregularly and may even stop at low speeds when mean effect 
pressure is reduced to about 2bar. This is because large amount of residual gas (more than in four-stroke 
engine) mixing with small amount of charge. At low speeds there may be back firing due to slow burning 
rate. Fuel injection improves idling and also eliminates backfiring as there is no fuel present in the inlet 
system. 
In CI engines there is no loss of fuel as the charge is only air and there is no difficulty at idling 
because the fresh charge (air) is not reduced. 
 
Advantages and disadvantages of two-stroke engines 
Two-stroke engines have certain advantages as well as disadvantages compared to four-stroke 
engines. In the following sections the main advantages and disadvantages are discussed briefly. 
 
Advantages of Two-stroke Engines 
(i) As there is a working stroke for each revolution, the power developed will be nearly twice that of a 
four-stroke engine of the same dimensions and operating at the same speed. 
(ii) The work required to overcome the friction of the exhaust and suction strokes is saved. 
(iii) As there is a working stroke in every revolution, a more uniform turning moment is obtained on the 
crankshaft and therefore, a lighter flywheel is required. 
(iv) Two-stroke engines are lighter than four-stroke engines for the same power output and speed. 
(v) For the same output, two-stroke engines occupy lesser space. 
(vi) The construction of a two-stroke cycle engine is simple because it has ports instead of valves. This 
reduces the maintenance problems considerably. 
(vii) In case of two-stroke engines because of scavenging, burnt gases do not remain in the clearance space 
as in case of four-stroke engines. 
 
Disadvantages of Two-Stroke Engines 
(i) High speed two-stroke engines are less efficient owing to the reduced volumetric efficiency. 
(ii) With engines working on Otto cycle, a part of the fresh mixture is lost as it escapes through the exhaust 
port during scavenging. This increases the fuel consumption and reduces the thermal efficiency. 
(iii) Part of the piston stroke is lost with the provision of the ports thus the effective compression is less in 
case of two-stroke engines. 
(iv) Two-stroke engines are liable to cause a heavier consumption of lubricating oil. 
(v) With heavy loads, two-stroke engines get heated due to excessive heat produced. Also at light loads, 
the running of engine is not very smooth because of the increased dilution of charge. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
27 
SI and CI Engine application 
We have seen that both SI and CI engines have certain advantages and disadvantages. The selection 
of a type of engine for particular application needs consideration of various factors. 
The SI engine offers the following advantages: 
(1) Low initial cost. 
(2) Low weight for a given power output. 
(3) Smaller size for a given power output. 
(4) Easy starting. 
(5) Less noise. 
(6) Less objectionable exhaust gas odor and less smoke. 
The SI engine finds wide application in automobiles because passenger comfort and in small 
airplanes because of low weight. Two stroke petrol engines finds extensive use in motor cycles, scooters, 
mopeds, pleasure motor boats, etc., because of simplicity and low cost. The SI engine is also used for light 
mobile duty like lawn movers, mobile generating sets, water pumps, air compressors, etc... 
The CI engine offers the following advantages. 
(1) Low specific fuel consumption at both full load and part load conditions. 
(2) Utilizes less expensive fuels. 
(3) Reduced fire hazard, 
(4) Long operating life. 
(5) Better suited for supercharging. 
(6) Better suited for two-stroke cycle operating, as there is no loss of fuel in scavenging. 
Because of fuel economy the CI engine finds wide usage in buses, trucks, locomotives, stationary 
generating plants, heavy duty equipment such as bulldozers, tractors and earthmoving machinery. Because 
of the reduced fire hazard the CI engine is also used for confined installations and marine use. The great 
advantage of the CI engine is lower fuel consumption which counteracts the disadvantage of higher initial 
cost, if the engine is used for long duties.  
(Table 2.6a gives complete comparison of the two types of 
engines.)
Comparison of two-stroke and four-stroke- engines (table 2.5) 
The two-stroke engine was developed to obtain valve simplification and a greater output from the 
same size of engine. Two-stroke engines have no valves but only ports (some two-stroke engines are fitted 
with conventional exhaust valve). This simplicity of the two-stroke engine makes it cheaper to produce. 
Theoretically a two-stroke engine will develop twice the power of a comparable four-stroke engine 
because of one power stroke every revolution (compared to one power stroke every two revolutions of 
four-stroke engine). This makes the two-stroke engine cheaper and more compact than a comparable four-
stroke engine. 
In actual practice power is not exactly doubled but is only about 30% extra because of (a) reduced 
effective stroke, and (b) due to increased heating caused by increased power strokes. The maximum speed 
is kept less than 4-stroke engine. The other advantages of the two-stroke engine are more uniform torque 
on crankshaft and complete exhaust of products of combustion. 
However, when applied to spark-ignition engine the two-stroke cycle has certain disadvantages 
which have restricted its use to only small engines suitable for motor cycles, scooters, mopeds, lawn 
mowers, out-board engines, etc. In spark-ignition engine (petrol engine) the charge consists of a mixture of 
air and fuel. During scavenging, as both inlet and exhaust ports are open simultaneously for some time, 
some part of the fresh charge containing fuel escapes with exhaust. This results in high fuel consumption 
and hence lower thermal efficiency. The other drawback of two-stroke SI engine is the lack of flexibility- 
the capacity to run with equal efficiency at any speed. If the throttle is closed below the best point, the 
amount of fresh mixture entering the cylinder is not enough to clear out all the exhaust, some of which 
remains to contaminate the fresh charge. This results in irregular running of the engine. 
The two-stroke diesel engine does not suffer from these defects. There is no loss of fuel with exhaust gases 
as the intake charge in diesel engine is air only. The two-stroke diesel engine is therefore used quite 
widely. Many of the biggest diesel engines work on this cycle. They are generally bigger than 60cm bore 
and are used in marine propulsion. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
28 
A disadvantage common to all two-stroke engines, petrol as well as diesel, is greater cooling and 
lubrication requirements due to one power stroke in each revolution of crankshaft. Consumption of 
lubricating oil is also high in the two-stroke engine due to higher temperatures.  
 
Table 2.5 Comparison of four-stroke and two-stroke cycle engines 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
29 
Fundamental differences between SI and CI engines 
Both SI and CI engines are internal combustion engines and have much in common. However, 
there are also certain fundamental differences that cause their operation to vary considerably. These are 
given in Table 2.6 
 
Table 2.6 Comparison of SI and CI engines 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
30 
table 2.6a detailed comparison of SI & CI engines 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
31 
References- 
1. I C Engines By M L Mathur & RP Sharma 
2. I C Engines By Ganesan 
