Chapter-8 
VALVE AND VALVE MECHANISM 
 
Types of valve operating 
mechanisms, 
valve 
springs, 
guides, push rods, rocker arms, 
tappets, valve timing diagrams, 
design 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
1
Valve and valve mechanism
To admit the air-fuel mixture in the engine cylinder and to force the 
exhaust gases out at correct timings, some control system is necessary, 
which is provided by the valves. 
 
The engine valves may be broadly divided into 3 main categories: 
1. Poppet valve 
2. Sleeve valve 
3. Rotary valve 
 
Out of these three, poppet valve is the one which is being universally used 
for automobile engines. 
 
The conventional automotive engine is 
fitted with mechanically operated poppet valves for 
both inlet and exhaust. A poppet valve consists of a 
disc of metal with a coaxial stem on one side 
which closes a circular opening in a wall 
separating two chambers, against which wall it is 
drawn by a spring. To open the valve, a force must 
be applied to it in, a direction contrary to that of 
the spring pressure. In the earliest automotive 
engines, 
the 
inlet- 
valves 
were 
opened 
automatically by the suction in the cylinder during 
the inlet stroke,. Automatic valves cannot be used 
in engines that must operate over a wide speed 
range, as they close too early at low and too late at 
high speeds to permit of good volumetric 
efficiency. 
These 
valves, 
moreover, 
are 
troublesome in service, because gum in the 
gasoline may cause them to stick. 
 
Poppet valves are lifted from their seats by 
means of cams, and are closed by springs. The rate 
at which the valve is opened and closed depends 
on the cam outline and on the type and size of cam 
follower employed. From the standpoint of gas 
flow it is, of course, desirable that the valve should 
open and close very quickly, and remain fully open 
for the greatest possible length of time. However, 
the valve gear must operate quietly, and in order to 
do this it must lift and drop the valves more or less 
gradually. Cams, therefore, usually are so designed 
that the valve begins to close as soon as it has 
attained its full lift, and there is no "dwell" in the 
full-open position 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
2
Construction of Poppet Valves
The poppet valve derives its name 
from its motion of popping up and down. 
This is also called "mushroom valve" 
because of its shape which is similar to a 
mushroom. It consists of a head and a stem 
as shown in Fig. 
 It possesses certain advantages over the 
other valve types because of which it is 
extensively used in the automotive engines: 
1. Simplicity of construction 
2. Self-centering. 
3. Free to rotate about the stem to 
 
new position. 
4. Maintenance of sealing efficiency 
 
is relatively easier. 
Generally inlet valves are larger than 
the exhaust valves, because speed of 
incoming air-fuel mixture is less than the 
velocity of exhaust gases which leave under 
pressure. Further, because of pressure, the 
density 
of 
exhaust 
gases 
is 
also 
comparatively high. Moreover, smaller 
exhaust valve is also preferred because of 
shorter path of heat flow in this case and consequent reduced thermal loading. 
Generally inlet valves and exhaust valves are 45% and 38% of the cylinder bore respectively. 
Further, to improve heat transfer to the cylinder head, the stem diameter of the exhaust valve is generally 
10 to 15% greater than that of the inlet valve. Moreover, the valve lift in both inlet and exhaust valves 
should be at least equal to 25% of the valve head diameter which would provide the annular valve-
opening area equal to the port throat area. If the valve lift is less, the volumetric efficiency of the engine 
will be decreased. On the other hand if it is excessive, the inertia of the valve actuating mechanism would 
be unduly large resulting in excessive noise and wear. 
The valve face angle (with the 
plane of the valve head) is generally 
kept 45° or 30°. A smaller face angle 
provides greater valve opening for a 
given lift, but poor sealing because of 
the reduced seating pressure for a 
given valve spring load. Due to this 
reason in some engines, the inlet valve 
face angle may be kept 30° or 45° 
whereas the exhaust valve face angle 
is only 45°, as this increases its heat 
dissipation. In some cases, a further 
differential angle of about 1/2 deg to 1 
deg is provided between the valve and its seating (Fig.), which results in better sealing conditions. 
The machined surface of the block or the cylinder head on which the valve rests when closed is 
known as the valve seat. This surface usually forms a truncated cone whose generatrices make an angle of 
either 45° or 30° with the plane of the valve head. During the early years of the industry flat-seated poppet 
valves were used to a certain extent, which have the advantage that for a given port diameter and lift, the 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
3
flow area is considerably greater than with conical valves. A disadvantage of flat-seated valves, which led 
to their abandonment-is that they are not self centering, and therefore are more likely to leak, especially 
after the guides have become worn. 
In the analysis it has been assumed that the flow through the valve is parallel to the seat elements. 
This is substantially correct at small lifts, when the distance between valve and seat is only a fraction of 
the width of the seat, but with increase in the lift the direction of flow changes. The gases naturally seek 
the path of least resistance, and in turning a corner they approach the inner boundary of the flow path. 
In an L-head engine the direction of flow on the side of the valve toward the cylinder, where the 
gases can flow off freely, is somewhat different from that on the opposite side, where there is only a 
moderate clearance between valve and valve-chamber wall. There the gases must describe nearly a semi-
circle, and in seeking the path of least resistance, they approach the edge of the valve head. The best 
measure of valve capacity evidently is the minimum sectional area normal to the direction of flow. 
From Fig., where the dashed lines are 
meant to represent the center lines of the 
flow paths, it can be seen that the direction 
of flow relative to the seat elements varies 
around the circumference of the valve. In 
modern engines the valve seats are made 
comparatively narrow, and in Fig., which 
closely represents actual proportions, the 
line BC connecting the inner edge of the 
valve seat at full lift with the outer edge of 
the seat on the block, makes an obtuse 
angle with the elements of the seats, 
instead of a right angle as in flat-seated 
valve Fig.. It has been suggested that the 
area of the conical frustrum of which BC, 
is an element be taken as a measure of the 
valve capacity, but in view of the fact that the direction of flow is not normal to that line this plan is of 
doubtful value.  
The valve lift generally is slightly more than one-fourth the port diameter in the case of 45-deg, and 
slightly less in the case of 30-deg valves. Valve-stem diameters are made equal to one-fourth the valve 
diameter. The outside diameter of the valve head will be about 1.175 times the port diameter. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
4
Valve-Operating Conditions
The heads of the valves are 
subjected to the high temperature of the 
burning gases, and it is essential that they 
should not warp under the influence of the 
heat, and that their seats should not scale or 
corrode, as in either case they would 
become leaky. Occasionally small particles 
of scale will get onto the valve seats, and 
the valve heads must be of sufficient 
hardness at the high temperature at which 
they operate so they will not pit under this 
condition. 
Lubrication of the valve stems is 
hard to effect, and the stems must not wear 
too rapidly in their guides, even though 
poorly lubricated or not lubricated at all. 
That portion of the stem immediately 
below the head is subject also to the heat of 
the burning gases which, when the exhaust 
opens rush by it at a velocity of up to  300 
fps; and to the corrosive action of 
unconsumed, hot oxygen and intermediate 
products of combustion. 
 
Trouble of a rather serious 
nature is sometimes caused by valves 
breaking a short distance below the 
head, at the point where their working 
temperature is the maximum. This is 
probably due to corrosion fatigue; in 
other words, it results from repetitive 
applications 
of 
mechanical 
stress 
combined with corrosive action by the 
exhaust gases or certain constituents 
thereof. Air-hardening properties of 
the valve steel sometimes have been 
blamed for such breakages, but these 
latter occur also with valves made of a 
steel having no such properties. High 
resistance to corrosion fatigue is 
therefore desirable in valve steels. 
Finally, the tip of the stem 
receives a quick succession of blows 
from the tappet as the clearance is 
being taken up, and it must be 
sufficiently hard to withstand these 
blows without undue wear. Hardening 
of the tips is sometimes effected by 
the so-called cyaniding process (dipping in a bath of molten potassium ferro-cyanide). 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
5
Valve-Operating Temperatures
Tests have .shown that 
under 
continued 
full-load 
conditions, exhaust valves may 
reach a temperature of 1475 F-
a cherry red. Valves of large 
diameter 
run 
hotter 
than 
smaller ones, and the valve 
temperature 
increases 
with 
engine speed. An increase in 
the compression ratio, as a 
rule, 
lowers 
the 
valve 
temperature, 
but 
if 
the 
compression is carried too high 
and detonation sets in, the 
effect is reversed. It is usually 
assumed that exhaust valve 
temperatures are highest with 
retarded ignition and weak mixtures, probably because the exhaust pipe is hottest under these conditions, 
but a large number of tests carried out on a particular engine showed that the reverse holds true, the 
exhaust-valve temperature being lower with a weak mixture and retarded ignition. The explanation is that 
the temperature of the valve depends not only on that of the exhaust gases, but also on the temperature of 
combustion, which latter is lowered by weakening the mixture and retarding the spark. 
 
It was found that the exhaust valve 
ran cooler when a long valve guide (Fig.) 
was used; that is, when the valve guide was 
carried closer to the valve head. The guide 
then has the effect of protecting the valve 
stem from the hot gases passing through the 
valve immediately after opening. One 
objection to such a long valve guide is that it 
is difficult to lubricate, and as a result wear 
on both the valve stem and guide is rapid. 
The experiment was therefore tried of 
enlarging the bore of the guide 0.016 in., by 
counter boring from the valve-head end as 
far as the wall of the valve pocket, and this 
was found to result in decreasing the valve 
temperature (27 deg at 1500 rpm and 72 deg 
at 4500 rpm). An increase in the valve-stem 
diameter from 0.343 to 0.405 in. lowered 
the temperature of the valve about 40 deg 
throughout the speed range. 
If an exhaust valve becomes leaky, as, for instance, through "dishing" of its head by reason of loss 
of strength at high temperature, through improper adjustment, or through excessive warping, the head will 
be destroyed very quickly, as the burning gases will then blow by it. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
6
Exhaust 
valves 
operate 
under 
relatively more severe conditions on account 
of higher temperatures involved. An exhaust 
valve is subjected to: 
1. Longitudinal cyclic stresses due to 
the return spring load and the inertia response 
of the valve assembly. 
2. 
Thermal 
stresses 
in 
the 
circumferential and longitudinal directions 
due to the large temperature gradient from the 
centre of the head to its periphery and from 
the crown to the stem. A typical variation of 
temperature in an exhaust valve is given in 
Fig. 
3. Creep conditions due to operation 
at very high temperatures, particularly in case 
of valve head. 
4. Corrosion conditions. 
 
Exhaust Valve Material Requirements 
On account of operating conditions described 
above the material for exhaust valve should 
have the following requirements. 
1. High strength and hardness to resist 
tensile loads and stem wear. 
2. High hot strength and hardness to 
combat head cupping and wear of seats. 
3. High fatigue and creep resistance. 
4. Adequate corrosion resistance. 
5. 
Least 
coefficient 
of 
thermal 
expansion to avoid excessive thermal stresses 
in the head. 
6. High thermal conductivity for better 
heat dissipation. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
7
Materials for Valves
Owing to the expensive character of the material necessary for the exhaust valves, the inlets are 
now generally made of more common and cheaper material. This practice is encouraged also by the fact 
that the inlet valves now are generally made of somewhat larger diameter, so they would not be 
interchangeable with the exhaust valves even if they were made of the same material. 
Both the mechanical and the thermal stresses on engine valves increase with the speed of 
operation, and as engine speeds have increased continuously, there has been a constant search for better 
materials, especially for the exhaust valves. Silicon-chromium (Silcrome) steel containing 3-3.5 per cent 
silicon and 8-9 per cent chromium came into use during the early twenties, and was considered an 
excellent exhaust-valve material at the time. This steel possessed good workability and good machining 
qualities, but it left something to be desired with respect to hot strength. While at normal temperature it 
showed a tensile strength in excess of 200,000 psi, at 1200 F this dropped to 42,000 psi, and at 1600 F it 
was only 4600 psi. The steel began to scale at 1800 F. Its resistance to warpage and corrosion at high 
temperatures was poor. 
In the middle thirties specific outputs had increased so much that a better material was needed for 
heavy-duty bus and truck engines. What was called for particularly was higher hot strength and a higher 
scaling temperature. These properties could be obtained by a more liberal use of alloying elements, 
particularly chromium, and a new type of valve steel was then introduced of which Silcrome XB, 
developed by Thompson Products, Inc., is representative. This has a higher carbon content than the 
original Silcrome steel, viz., 0.60-0.86 per cent; less silicon, 1.25-2.75; but more than twice as much 
chromium, 19.00-23.00, and in addition from 1.00 to 2.00 per cent nickel. This steel resists warping much 
better, and it also has greater resistance to heat corrosion. At 1600 F its tensile strength is 7625 psi, and its 
scaling temperature is 2150 F. 
Austenitic Valve Steels 
More recently so-called austenitic, non hardening steels have been introduced as a 
material; for exhaust valves. They excel silicon-chromium steel with respect to hot strength, impact value, 
hot hardness, and resistance to oxidation and corrosion. These steels, which contain high percentages of 
chromium and nickel-the combined contents of these two elements usually ranging between 25.00 and 
30.00 per cent-in addition to being non-responsive to heat treatment, are non-magnetic. 
 
An austenitic valve steel contains 0.30-0.45 carbon, 0.80-1.30 manganese, 2.50-3.25 
silicon, 17.50-20.50 chromium, 7.00-9.00 nickel and not over 0.03 phosphorus and sulphur each. 
 
It has a hot strength of 17,500 psi at 1600 F and a scaling temperature of 2200 F. But while 
these austenitic valve steels possess many advantages, they also have some undesirable qualities. One 
thing against them is that their coefficient of heat expansion is materially greater than that of silicon-
chromium steel (0.000011 as compared with 0.0000078). This calls for a slightly greater clearance 
between the valve stem and its guide and between the valve and its tappet. For heavy-duty engines a 
valve-stem clearance of 0.010 to 0.015 in. per inch of stem diameter is recommended. The hardness of 
austenitic steel is rather low (about 45 Rockwell C, as compared with 55 for the original Silcrome steel) 
,and it does not resist the hammering action on the tip very well, especially where there is line or point 
contact, as with rocker arms contacting the tip. To meet this condition, valves of heavy-duty engines 
sometimes have tips of Stellite or tool steel applied by either electric or acetylene welding. The wear of 
austenitic valve stems' in the guides also is somewhat more rapid than that of other steels. This difficulty 
may be overcome by nitriding the stems, but the injurious effect of tetraethyllead on nitrided surfaces 
would seem to discourage this practice. Cold-working (rolling) of the stems to increase their hardness 
also has been suggested. The various processes by which nonmetallic coatings are formed on wearing 
surfaces to keep them from scoring may be applied also to valve stems. Carbon-steel stems may be. 
welded to heads of austenitic steel, which has the further advantage that the carbon steel is much lower in 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
8
cost. This process of building up valves by welding has been carried to its logical conclusion by welding 
heads of a material resistant to scaling and pitting, to a stem of a material having good bearing qualities in 
cast iron under conditions of poor lubrication, and to the latter a tip of a material which is capable tappet 
action well of withstanding the 
Precipitation-Hardening Steel 
The latest addition to the list of exhaust-valve materials is a steel intermediate between the 
ferritic and the austenitic types; it shares the property of harden ability with the ferritic steels, and high hot 
strength with the austenitic. This steel, Silcrome XCR, contains 0.40-0.50 carbon, not more than 1.00 
manganese, 23.25-24.25 chromium, 4.50-5.00 nickel, 2.50-3.00 molybdenum, and not more than 0.035 
phosphorus and sulphur each. At 1600 F it shows a tensile strength of 20,000 psi, which is a tremendous 
improvement over the 4600 psi of the original Silcrome. With respect to heat expansion it is intermediate 
between the ferritic Silcromes and the austenitic type. Its oxidation and corrosion resistances are 
excellent, but its workability is only fair, and its machinability definitely poor. Valves of Silcrome XCR 
are hardened to 48-58 Scleroscope all over, and owing to the relatively great hardness, both the seat and 
the stem wear well. This steel must be forged within a narrow temperature range; if overheated it loses its 
hardenability; while if forged at too lower temperature, it is likely to shatter, its impact value being quite 
low. In spite of these drawbacks and its rather high cost, this steel is being used extensively for the 
exhaust valves of heavy-duty engines. 
 
Materials for Inlet Valves
The inlet valve does not present nearly so difficult a materials problem as the exhaust valve, as the 
temperature attained by it in service is always considerably lower. Two types of low alloysteel are used 
extensively for inlet valves. Nos. 3140 and 8645. The former is a chrome-nickel steel- containing 1.0 to 
1.5 percent of nickel and 0.50-0.80 percent chromium (besides 0.37-0.45 per cent carbon and 0.60-0.95 
per cent manganese); the latter a chromium-nickel-molybdenum steel containing 0.35-0.75 percent nickel, 
0.35-0.65 per cent chromium, and 0.12- 0.25 per cent molybdenum, besides normal amounts of carbon 
and manganese. Some-use has been made of a medium-alloy chromenickel- silicon steel-with(8 to 9 per 
cent nickel, 12 to 13 per cent chromium, and 2.5 to3 per cent silicon. This CNS steel, which has low 
carbon and manganese contents, is said to be immune to the corrosive influences of tetra-ethyl lead. 
 
Miscellaneous Considerations
1. An adequately designed valve with proper material can also fail due to local stress 
concentrations if there is any unevenness around the valve-seat interface on account of distortion of valve 
heads or seats, bending of valve stem or trapping of carbon particles between the valve and the seat. 
2. Excessive surface finish of the valve stem will result in loss of lubricating oil film, while 
excessive roughness of the stem would increase the guide wear. A thin layer of chromium giving the 
surface finish of about 0.5 µm would provide the optimum condition. 
3. As engine thermal efficiency is increased with increase of compression ratio, lower valve 
temperatures would result in case of higher compression ratio. 
4. Arranging the inlet and the exhaust ports in the cylinder head alternately would increase the 
transfer of heat from the exhaust to the inlet valves, compared to the case when the like valves are placed 
together. This would result in decreased exhaust valve temperatures. However, this would also complicate 
the design of the inlet and the exhaust manifolds in case both are to be on the same side of the engine. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
9
Form and Dimensions of Head
The valve head should be made of the minimum thickness consistent with strength requirements. 
In American practice, the top of the head is usually made spherical and the bottom surface conical. This 
gives a head which is much thicker at the center (where the bending moment is the maximum) than at the 
edge. Poppet valves have been standardized by the.S.A.E. 
The seat on the valve head must project slightly beyond the seat in the cylinder casting at both top 
and bottom, in order that no shoulder will be formed on the-casting when the valve is ground in. A fairly 
wide seat is an advantage, as it helps to keep down the temperature of the head. The heat absorbed from 
the burning gases by the valve head has only two paths through which to flow off-down the valve stem to 
the valve guide and thence into the cylinder block and jacket, and through the valve seat directly into the 
block-and with the- conventional design by far the greater portion passes off through the seat. 
 
In Fig. is shown the form of head generally used for steel valves in 
American practice, as fixed by the S.A.E. standard. 
 
Fig. is the so-called tulip valve, used to a considerable extent in 
aircraft and racing engines, which is thought to facilitate How through 
the valve port. 
 
Fig. shows a form of valve that is intermediate between the S.A.E. 
standard and the tulip type, which has come into use in recent years. It has 
a Hat-top head and a rather large fillet between head and stem, which 
latter tends to improve How conditions and to add to the strength of the 
stem near its junction with the head. Sometimes that part of the stem 
which does not enter the guide is made to taper slightly from the fillet 
down. 
To ensure good seating of the valve, -it should be made with an 
interference angle of 1 deg. That is to say, the included angle of the valve 
face should be made 1 deg greater than that of the seat face, so that 
initially the valve seats only on the outer edge. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
10
Sodium-Cooled Valves
The exhaust valve temperatures in modern engines reach very high values of the order of 750°C. 
In heavy duty engines, it may be still higher. Therefore, cooling of exhaust valves becomes very 
important. To do this cooling water jackets are arranged as near the valve as possible. In many cases, 
nozzles are directed towards the hot spot caused by the exhaust valve. 
Large valves of heavy-duty engines can be 
kept at a reasonably low temperature by sodium-
cooling, which is now employed extensively for 
aircraft-engine valves, and occasionally for bus- and 
truck-engine valves. 
Originally a mixture of potassium nitrate and 
lithium nitrate was used, which melts at about 
260 F, but later metallic sodium -was substituted for 
these salts. 
The advantages of sodium are a low specific gravity 
(0.97), a high specific heat, a low melting point (207 
F), and a high boiling point (1616 F). Fig. shows a 
section of a sodium-cooled valve designed for use in 
aircraft engines. The stem is of somewhat larger 
diameter than usual, and is drilled out from the end 
& the chamber thus formed, after being nearly closed 
at the end by   swaging process, is filled about half 
full with metallic sodium. Assuming the valve to be 
positioned as in an L-head vertical engine, the 
sodium will be at the bottom (tip end) of the chamber 
when the valve is closed. it may be seen that in 
normal operation the valve is alternately accelerated 
and decelerated at rates many times that due to gravity, with the result that the sodium is thrown violently 
from one end of the chamber to the other. When at the top end, it absorbs heat from the hot wall, which it 
gives up to the cooler, lower end of the stem when next it drops to the bottom of the chamber, whence the 
heat passes to the valve guide and into the cylinder block. These sodium-cooled valves are sometimes 
furnished with an inner lining of copper, which latter has four times the heat conductivity of valve steels. 
The end of the stem is sealed with a steel plug, over which is welded a cap of hard steel. 
In the sodium-cooled valve shown in Fig., which is of an earlier design, only the stem is hollow 
and partly filled with sodium. Later it was found possible to make both the head and the stem hollow, as 
in Fig., which shows a valve designed for installation in the cylinder head. In operation the highest 
temperatures are reached by the center portion of the top surface of the valve and a point on the stem 
some distance below the head. In comparative tests under similar conditions with a conventional "solid" 
valve, a sodium cooled valve with hollow stem, and a sodium-cooled valve with hollow stem and head, 
the maximum temperatures reached by the center portions of the heads were approximately 1380 F, 1240 
F, and 1170 F, respectively. At the seat the temperatures of the valves in these cases ranged between 1000 
F and 1100 F. In solid valves the higher temperature of the center portion of the head sometimes results in 
the formation of cracks at the seat. 
There can be no doubt as to the great operating advantages of sodium-cooled valves, and the only 
reason they are not widely used in automotive engines is that they are rather expensive to produce. 
Considerable effort has been devoted in recent years to the development of improved processes of 
production. In one process a piece of steel tubing of slightly more than the diameter of the finished stem, 
after being cut off to the right length, is upset at one end and then spun to what may be called "tulip 
shape." A disc of steel is then welded on to close the opening in the head, while the end of the stem is 
closed in the same way as in the case of a valve in which only the stem is hollow. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
11
Valve Seats
The valve seats must be faced very accurately, so that there is complete contact between the valve 
and the valve seat when the former closes. Valve seat face is thus ground to the same angle to which the 
valve face is ground. This may have any value from 30° to 45°. For cylinder blocks or heads made of grey 
iron, the inlet valve seats are directly machined on the cylinder blocks or heads as the case may be 
because working conditions are not severe. These are called integral seats. However, where aluminium 
blocks or heads are used, separate valve seat inserts are employed even for inlet valves. For the exhaust 
valves, always the separate valves seat inserts are used, the operating conditions being very severe. Insert 
seats are also used as salvage procedure when badly damaged integral seats are reconditioned. Valve seat 
inserts are simply rings made of alloy steel consisting of chromium, silicon, tungsten or cobalt with a 
conical seat on one of the inside edges. These are force-fitted in the recesses machined in the cylinder 
head. When worn, these inserts can be easily replaced. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
12
Valve Springs
Helical springs are used to keep the 
valve in constant contact with the tappet and 
the tappet with the cam. Since the spring is 
subject to compressive loads, it is ground 
flat at each end to ensure even distribution 
of pressure. The coil ends are also placed 
diametrically opposed to avoid the bending 
tendency of the spring under compression. 
The arrangement for the retention of the 
springs is simple. A ring split into two 
halves with internal projection to fit into the 
valve spring retaining groove and the outer 
surface tapered is employed. Over the split 
ring another ring is inverted which supports 
the spring. The valve springs are subject to 
heavy service. These are, therefore, made 
from high grade spring steel wire, the 
materials 
being 
generally 
hard-drawn 
carbon steel or chrome-vanadium steel. 
Valve springs are often shot peened to make 
them fatigue resistant. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
13
Valve Rotators
Ordinarily the temperature is not uniform around the circumference of a valve head, being highest 
where the greatest mass of hot gases passes over it, as on the side nearest the cylinder in an L-head 
engine. By actual test it was found that in an engine of this type, under certain operating conditions, the 
exhaust valve- seat insert reached a temperature about 280 F higher on the "near" than on the "far" side, 
and there can be little doubt that even greater temperature differences exist between opposite sides of the 
valve head. Such temperature differences cause distortion and leakage. If while in operation the valve 
could be made to rotate on its seat, that would tend to equalize temperatures and keep down their 
maximum value. It would tend to keep the seat clean and if leakage should start at any point of the 
circumference, the resulting damage to the valve would be reduced. A number of so-called valve rotators 
have been brought out, but so far they have not come into extensive use, probably because they have not 
always been reliable. Some merely "free" the valve of the restraining effect of the friction due to the 
spring pressure, while others, in addition, convert some of the axial force producing the opening or the 
closing motion into a tangential force. The problem of a simple mechanism that will positively rotate the 
valve on its seat evidently is not an easy one, and complicated and delicate mechanisms can hardly be 
tolerated in the valve gear. However, according to one valve specialist, positive rotation is more effective 
in prolonging valve life than any other known means. 
 
Fig. shows a valve-rotating mechanism. The valve spring rests on a seating collar which transmits 
the spring pressure to the retainer cap through a conical spring washer. When the valve is closed (left 
view) the pressure of the valve spring is relatively light, hence the spring washer is distended and bears 
with its inner edge on the retainer cap at 2. As the valve is being lifted (right view) the pressure of the 
spring increases, the spring washer flattens out, and its point of support is transferred from 2 on the 
retainer cap to 3 on the steel balls, which latter rest on inclined surfaces on the retainer cap. The effect of 
the incline is to create a 
horizontal 
force 
component tending to 
produce 
relative 
angular 
motion 
between spring washer 
and retainer cap. Both 
parts are subject to 
friction, 
but 
the 
restraining moment on 
the spring washer is 
much greater than that 
on the valve, and as a 
result 
an 
angular 
motion is imparted to 
the assembly consisting 
of valve, retainer cap 
and 
retainer 
lock. 
During each valve lift 
each ball moves down 
the 
incline, 
and 
in 
between 
lifts 
it 
is 
returned to the top of 
the incline by a light 
spring. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
14
Valve Guides
In low-cost engines the valve guides are sometimes cast integral with the 
cylinder block or head, but the more general practice is to make them in the form of a 
bushing which is pressed into a hole drilled in the cylinder or head casting. Separate 
guides have the advantage that they can be renewed when worn. A fairly close fit for 
the valve stem in the guide is necessary, particularly in the case of inlet valves, 
because if there is excessive clearance between the stem and guide of these valves, air 
will be drawn into the cylinder through this clearance during the inlet stroke and 
dilute the charge received by the cylinder. If the clearances of the valve stems of an 
engine differ, the charges received by the different cylinders will be unequally 
diluted, a condition that cannot be corrected by carburetor adjustment. In passenger-
car engines the clearance between inlet-valve stem and guide ranges between 0.002 
and 0.003 in. It is very difficult to lubricate the exhaust valve guides effectively, 
owing to the high temperatures reached by them, and these, therefore, are subject to 
comparatively rapid wear. Exhaust-valve stems should have a clearance of between 
0.002 and 0.004 in. in their guides. 
Separate guides are usually made of cast iron, of 1/8 to 3/16-in. wall 
thickness, and are made a force fit in the hole in the cylinder or head casting. 
Sometimes the guide is provided with a flange or shoulder which abuts against a 
finished surface on the cylinder or head casting as the guide is pressed into position, 
but more generally this is omitted. 
The exhaust-valve guide is preferably made to extend substantially up to the point of the stem 
where the fillet under the head begins, as it has been found that this keeps the valve head cooler than a 
design which leaves more of the stem exposed to the action of the hot gases during the exhaust period. A 
slight further reduction of the valve-head temperature can be achieved by counter boring the upper part of 
the valve guide, or, alternatively, undercutting the upper part of the valve stem, so that there is no contact 
between stem and guide over this portion of the length of the latter, which then serves merely as a shield 
for the valve stem, protecting it from the 
hot gases rushing by during the exhaust 
period. The guides of inlet valves are 
preferably made shorter, so that they 
project into the valve pocket only very 
slightly, as this reduces the resistance to 
flow. As indicated in Fig., in the case of 
the exhaust valve it is advantageous to 
water-jacket the whole length of the 
boss for the valve guide, as this keeps 
down the valve temperature. Lengths of 
valve guides are usually between 2 and 
3 times the valve-port diameter. 
An unusual type of valve guide 
(Fig.) was used in early Ford engines. 
The valves of this engine were formed 
with an enlargement on the end of their 
stem, which supported a horseshoe-
shaped spring retainer. Owing to this 
enlargement, it was impossible to insert the valve into a one-piece guide. The guide therefore was split 
through its axis, and valve and guide were inserted and with drawn together. The guide was held in 
position in the bore in the cylinder block by a horseshoe-shaped stamping which entered a groove turned 
in the guide and rested against a machined surface on the block. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
15
Design of Valve Tappets
In L-head engines the valves are operated from the cams 
through the intermediary of tappets, which latter usually consist of 
a cylindrical steel part moving in a cast-iron guide formed on or 
secured to the crankcase. The tappet carries the cam follower at its 
lower end and is provided with clearance adjusting means at its 
upper end. 
 
In the design of these members, 
lightness is an important consideration, 
since the strength of the valve spring 
required and the shock and noise 
produced by the lifting action are directly 
proportional to the weight of the parts 
moved by the cam, which include the 
tappet. In Fig. is shown a section of a 
roller-type tappet. Its body A is drilled out 
from the top for the sake of lightness, and 
its lower end is slotted to receive the roller 
B carried on roller pin C. A roller-type 
cam follower must be held in alignment 
with the cam, and to this end the guide is 
extended downwardly and slotted to 
receive the roller. At its upper end the 
tappet is threaded internally to receive the adjusting screw E, which latter also is 
drilled out. After a clearance adjustment has been made by means of screw E, the 
latter is locked by check nut F. 
Two tappets for use with mushroom-type cams 
are shown in Fig.. The one on the left is a very light 
design which provides ample bearing surface. The other 
one is of tubular stock and has the foot welded to it. A 
foot of cast iron sometimes is welded to a tubular shank 
and is hardened by chilling. In other cases the entire 
tappet is made of cast iron. Tappets have been made also 
in which the wearing surface of the foot was provided 
with a veneer of Stellite or some other hard alloy. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
16
Tappets are used also in valve-in-head engines, but in that 
case the clearance-adjusting means are located on the top of the 
engine, where they are more accessible. Two designs of tappets for 
this type of engine are shown in Fig.. The one on the left is 
thimble shaped and formed on the inside with a spherical seat for 
the ball end of the side rod. Solid side rods are used where the 
distance between the tappet and the rocker lever is comparatively 
short, as where the camshaft is located on the side of the cylinder 
block; with the camshaft in the crankcase, tubular side rods are 
preferable, because of their greater resistance to buckling. It will 
be seen that the side rod is shown to make a small angle with the 
axis of the tappet. This has the advantage that its reaction on the 
tappet has a small horizontal component which can be made to 
counteract the friction between cam and tappet, thus reducing the 
friction encountered by the latter. In the design shown at the right 
the spherical seat for the tubular side rod is at the top  
The tappet bearing surface must be 
brought down as close to the cam as feasible, 
because the load on it is an overhanging load, 
and if the overhang were great the pressure near 
the lower end of the bearing would be quite 
intense. With mushroom type cam followers it 
is a good plan to offset the follower lengthwise 
from the middle of the cam, so it will rotate in. 
its bearing, and no groove will wear in its foot. 
Such an arrangement is shown in Fig.. 
In the past it has been customary to 
make the contact surface of the tappet foot flat. 
However, the cam usually is located closer to 
one supporting bearing than to the other, and 
when the camshaft flexes under the lifting 
impact, its contact element or surface will be 
inclined toward the flat tappet surface, which 
results in stress concentration at one side of the 
cam. To prevent such stress concentration, 
tappet-foot surfaces now are sometimes made spherical, with a radius of 30 in. or more. To cause tappets 
with spherical contact surface to rotate, the cams are made to taper slightly in the axial direction. 
 
Clearance Required
The amount of valve clearance required has increased in the course of time, because modern 
engines, on account of their much higher speeds, operate at higher temperatures. In passenger-car engines 
of the L-head type the average clearance between pushrod and valve stem with the engine cold is about 
0.010 in. for the inlet, and 0.012 in. for the exhaust valves. For service purposes the "hot" clearances 
usually are specified, and are somewhat smaller than the figures given. Valve-in-head engines require 
greater clearances, especially where the cam motion is amplified by the tappet levers. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
17
Automatic "Zero-Clearance" Tappets
By means of a hydraulic device supplied with oil from the engine 
lubricating system (or from a separate source), it is possible to take up 
clearance between the tappet and valve automatically as soon as it develops. 
A hydraulic tappet is used extensively by engine manufacturers. A 
sectional view of this tappet is shown in Fig.. The adjusting means is a 
separate hydraulic unit which is set into the valve lifter body during the 
process of assembly. The lifter body is of substantially the same design as 
the conventional valve lifter, hence only the hydraulic unit needs to be 
described. 
 
Oil from the engine lubricating system is delivered to a chamber 
adjacent to the tappet guide, and is fed into the lifter from a point near the 
bottom of the chamber. It enters the annular groove in the tappet body and 
passes through the radial hole therein, into the cavity below the hydraulic 
unit. In order that the hydraulic unit may function properly, the oil must be 
free from air bubbles, and suitable means are provided to de-aerate it before 
it enters the tappet. The tube extending down from the hydraulic unit also 
assists somewhat in the separation of air, and it assures that practically all of 
the oil in the cavity forms a reserve supply for starting. Oil from the cavity 
passes through the ball-type check valve into the adjusting chamber below 
the plunger. A light spring holds the plunger against the valve stem, and the 
face of the lifter in constant contact with the 
cam. The bottom of the plunger clears the 
bottom of the bore by about 1/I6 in. In this 
manner the air is worked out at the time of 
installation, the lifter is always filled with oil, 
and the clearance is entirely taken up by the oil 
column below the plunger. Hydraulic tappets 
of this type assure silent operation, eliminate 
the need for valve adjustment, and increase 
valve life. They obviate the need for a quieting ramp on the cam. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
18
Rocker Arm and Rocker Shaft
The function of the rocker arm is to 
reverse the upward motion of the push rod to 
downward motion of the valve and vice versa. 
The rocker arm may be either solid or hollow. 
A
stationary hollow rocker shaft 
serves as a pivot to the rocker arms and 
provides 
passage 
for 
lubricating 
oil 
simultaneously. Rocker arm is made of steel 
(forged or stamped) or iron (cast). Cast rocker 
arms are comparatively cheaper but are not as 
strong as forged or stamped ones. However, 
these give satisfactory service in cars. 
Stamped rocker arms have been found to be 
light, very strong, yet cheapest of all the 
types. Rocker shafts are made from hollow 
steel tubing. A typical material for these 
would consist of 0.55% carbon, 0.2% silicon, 
0.65% manganese and the remainder iron. 
After machining the shaft is case-hardened. It 
is mounted on cast iron or aluminium 
pedestals placed between each pair of rocker 
arms. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
19
Push Rod
It 
serves 
to 
transmit 
the 
reciprocating motion of the valve lifter 
to the rocker arm. Since the valve lifter 
moves in a straight line whereas the 
rocker arm end moves in an arc about 
its pivot, to provide compatibility of the 
two, the push rod forms part of ball and 
socket joints on both ends. Push rods 
are made of carbon-manganese steel. A 
typical push rod steel contains 0.35% 
carbon, 
0.2% 
silicon 
and 
1.5% 
manganese. 
After 
hardening 
and 
tempering, a hardness of about 250 
B.H.N. is obtained. The push rod may 
be either solid or hollow. A hollow 
push rod is lighter, resulting in decrease 
of inertia forces. Further, it may also 
serve as a passage for oil for lubrication 
of the valve actuating mechanism. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
20
Dual Valves
Large valves are more troublesome than small ones, because a large disc will be warped more by 
the heat, and, besides, the weight of the valve increases rapidly 
with the linear dimensions, hence the stress on the valve and 
its mechanism due to rapid opening and closing becomes very 
great for large diameters. For this reason it has become 
customary in high-speed engines with large cylinder bores to 
use two inlet and two exhaust valves per cylinder. 
An experimental investigation of the relative capacities 
of large and small valves was made in connection with the 
development of the Liberty aircraft engine, and the conclusions 
reached were that at the same pressure drop, one valve of 
diameter D and lift h is equal in capacity to, first, a pair of 
valves of diameter O.707D (equal port area) and lift 0.70h and, 
second, a pair of valves of diameter 0.6D and lift h, for values 
of h not exceeding about O.25D. Engines with two, three, four 
& five valves are shown in the following Figures. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
21
Valve Timing
The valves are operated by cams on a shaft which turns at one-half the speed of the crankshaft, so 
that each valve is opened and closed once during two revolutions of the crankshaft. In order that an engine 
may operate satisfactorily at high speeds, it is necessary that the exhaust valve open before the end of the 
power stroke and close after the completion of the exhaust stroke; and that the inlet open before the end of 
the exhaust stroke and close after the completion of the inlet stroke. This involves an overlapping of the 
exhaust and inlet periods, which is made necessary in part by the very slow opening and closing motions 
now employed for the sake of quiet operation. If the inlet began to open only after the exhaust had closed, 
the effective valve opening during a considerable part of the inlet stroke would be so small that the 
incoming charge would be seriously throttled. For an engine which is intended to "peak" at 3000-4000 
rpm the valve timing shown in Fig. should prove satisfactory. That there is considerable latitude with 
respect to the different valve functions may be seen from the following table which applies to 1953 
passenger-car engines: 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
22
Overhead Valves
Valves in the head are operated either by tappet 
rods extending up the side of the cylinders, or by means of 
an overhead camshaft. When tappet rods are used, they 
extend up through an enclosed space and the rocker arms, 
etc., at the top of the engine are enclosed by a valve cover, 
which is usually of pressed steel. When the whole valve 
mechanism is thus enclosed, not only are any noises 
produced by it muffled, but the joints can all be effectively 
lubricated and all bearings are protected against dust. In 
multi-cylinder overhead-valve engines the rocker arms are 
mounted on a hollow shaft, to which is connected a lead 
from the pressure lubricating system. At the center of each 
rocker arm bearing an oil hole is drilled through the wall-of 
the hollow shaft, so that oil will feed to the bearing surface, 
and sometimes a hole is drilled lengthwise of the rocker 
arm from the rocker bearing surface to the 
point of contact with the valve 
stem. By placing the breather 
pipe on the valve cover and 
establishing communication with 
the crankcase by means of the 
tappet-rod passages, an oil-misty 
atmosphere is created in the valve 
chamber, and the lubrication of 
all bearings is provided for. 
 
With 
tappet 
rods 
extending up the side of the 
cylinder block, as shown in Fig., 
the weight of the moving parts 
naturally is greater than in L head 
engines, and every effort should 
be made to lighten these parts. 
The tappet rods preferably are 
made of steel tubing of an outside 
diameter of about 3/8 in. for the 
size 
of 
cylinder 
used 
in 
passenger-car engines. Into the 
lower end of the tube can be 
fitted a thrust pin with a half-
round head which has a bearing 
in a socket formed on a thrust 
block set into the hollow tappet. 
At the top an internally threaded sleeve with a hexagon on it is fitted over the tube, and receives the 
clearance-adjusting screw, which latter has a spherical head nested in a socket formed on the end of the 
rocker-lever arm. Owing to the fact that all contact surfaces are very liberal in size, and of such shape that 
they naturally retain any oil getting onto them, there is usually very little wear on these surfaces. The 
rocker levers usually are drop forgings, though one manufacturer has made them of steel pressings. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
23
In determining the weight of the valve-
reciprocating parts where rocker levers are used, it is 
necessary to first find the radius of gyration of the 
rocker lever, which can be done either by calculation 
or experimentally by the pendulum method. The 
actual weight of the rocker is then reduced in the 
proportion of the radius of gyration to the length of 
the rocker arm bearing on the side rod, and the value 
thus obtained is added to the weight of the tappet 
and side rod. The weight of the valve and parts 
moving with it is reduced in the proportion of valve 
motion to tappet motion, and then added to the other 
weights. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
24
Overhead Camshahs
The simplest and 
most direct method 
of actuating valves 
in 
the 
cylinder 
head is by means 
of 
an 
overhead 
camshaft, Fig.. It 
reduces 
the 
necessary 
weight 
of 
valve 
reciprocating parts, 
thus 
making 
it 
possible 
to 
get 
along with lighter 
springs 
and 
to 
increase 
the 
maximum speed. 
It appears that one 
reason for the less 
quiet operation of 
the engine is that 
the source of the 
noise (the cam gear) is directly underneath the hood, and the noise is therefore more readily transmitted to 
the passengers ears than when it originates down in the crankcase. It has been found that a contributing 
factor to noise in the valve gear is the discontinuity of the torque; that is, when the nose of a cam has 
passed a cam follower, the pressure of the valve spring causes the cam and its shaft to snap forward, 
thereby taking up the clearance between gear teeth. Trouble from this source may be guarded against by 
"burdening" the camshaft with additional load, such as the fan, water pump, or generator.  
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
25
Valve Actuating Mechanisms
In 
all 
the 
valve 
actuating 
mechanisms a cam driven at half the 
crankshaft  speed is used to operate each 
valve inlet or exhaust. However, there 
are different methods of operating the 
valves from the cam.  
 
These may be broadly divided 
into two types viz., 
 
1. Mechanisms with side camshaft and 
2.The 
mechanisms 
with 
overhead 
camshaft. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
26
1. Mechanisms with side camshaft 
 
In these the camshaft is on the side of the engine and the valves are operated either directly by the 
cams or through the push rods and rocker arms. 
 
These may be further classified as: 
 
(a)Double row side valve mechanism (T-head) 
This is the oldest type of valve 
actuating mechanism and is shown in 
Fig. In this the inlet and the exhaust 
valves 
are 
operated 
by 
separate 
camshafts which makes the mechanism 
complicated. Moreover the shape of the 
combustion chamber provides poor 
combustion and low engine performance 
due to which this type of mechanism is 
obsolete. 
 
(b) Single row side valve mechanism (L-head) 
 
In this the inlet and the exhaust valves are all arranged in a single row 
and operated from the same 
camshaft (Fig.). This method was once quite popular on account of the 
following advantages: 
 
(i) Low engine height. 
(ii) Low production cost. 
(iii) Quiet operation. 
(iv) Ease of lubrication 
 
This mechanism is, however, no more in 
use, because it was found to be very inefficient on 
account of the complicated shape of the combustion 
chamber which is more prone to detonation. There 
were also restrictions of space on the size of inlet 
valves that would be used. Moreover, difficulties 
were experienced in cooling the exhaust valves. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
27
(c) Overhead inlet and side exhaust valve mechanism (F-head) 
This is a combination of the two systems described above. 
Overhead valve mechanism is used for the inlet valve operation and 
the side valve mechanism for the exhaust valve. It is used in F-head 
engines. This mechanism is simpler than the overhead camshaft 
operated types and allows the use of larger inlet valves, but larger 
valves being heavier, there is also a limitation on the maximum 
speed of the engine that could be allowed. F-head engines were 
found to be less efficient and were also more expensive due to which 
these have also become obsolete. 
 
(d) Single row overhead valve mechanism (I-head) 
This type is used quite extensively these days and is shown 
in Fig.. The cam operates the valve lifter which in turn actuates the 
push rod. The push rod further operates the rocker arm, which 
actuates the valve.  
This type of mechanism is having the following advantages: 
(i) Higher volumetric efficiency than the side valve design. 
(ii) Higher compression ratios can be used. 
(iii) Leaner air-fuel mixtures can be burnt. 
(iv) The rocker-arm leverage makes it possible to impart 
desired cam profile lift multiplication to the system and hence use 
smaller cam lobes compared to the side valve mechanism. 
The above advantages are, however, accompanied by some 
drawbacks of the mechanism. 
These are, 
(i) The valve operation, on account of the 
elasticity of the system and the resulting vibrations, is 
not very precise while accelerating or 
operating at high engine speeds. 
(ii) Larger valve lifter clearances are required. 
(iii) Noisy operation. 
(iv) Greater maintenance required due to more 
wear at more joints.  
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
28
2. Mechanisms with overhead camshaft 
The 
valve 
operating 
mechanisms with overhead single or 
double 
camshafts 
are 
highly 
efficient. 
However, 
with 
these 
considerably more lubricating oil is 
needed to flood the cam profiles as 
compared to the overhead valves 
operated 
by 
side 
camshafts. 
Moreover, 
they 
have 
the 
disadvantage of higher initial costs. 
Figure. shows single row 
valves operated by a single overhead 
camshaft and an inverted bucket 
type follower. With this type of 
follower, the camshaft is arranged directly over 
the valve stems. This type of mechanism is direct 
and very rigid so that valve movement follows 
precisely the designed cam-profile lift. Moreover, 
valve stems are not subjected to side-thrust which 
means less wear. Tappet clearances are also quite 
small and do not require adjustment very often. 
However, drive to the camshaft is quite 
complicated, positive lubrication is required and 
adjustment of valve lifter clearance is relatively 
more difficult. 
A
similar valve-operating mechanism
with end-pivoted rocker arm is shown in Fig..
The rocker arm provides leverage ratio, which 
enables the designer to provide smaller cam 
profile. Moreover, the inertia of rocker arm 
follower is less compared to the sliding bucket 
type described earlier and adjustment of tappets is 
easy. However, due to the elastic bending of the 
rocker arm, the stiffness of the system and hence 
precision of valve operation is decreased, a side-
thrust is produced to the valve stem and guide 
and more wear and noise occur. 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
29
In Fig. is depicted a mechanism for 
inlet and exhaust valves in separate rows, but 
operated by a single overhead camshaft with 
inverted bucket type follower and the pivoted
rocker arm.
However, quite often the double-row 
valves are operated by two separate overhead 
camshafts as shown in Figures. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
30
Comparison of the Side Camshaft and the Overhead Camshaft Mechanisms 
 
The overhead camshaft type valve actuating 
mechanisms is generally preferred over the side 
camshaft type mainly because of its greater rigidity 
since the camshaft directly operates the valve 
instead of operating through push rod and rocker 
arm. Due to this the valve is opened and closely 
quicker with decreased vibrations and undesirable 
oscillation. This means in case of high-lift, high-
acceleration cam profile, the valve operation in 
case of overhead camshaft is much more precise 
and smooth than in case of the side camshaft valve 
system. 
 
However, in case of overhead camshaft with inverted 
bucker follower, the valve lift is equal to the cam lift, whereas in 
case of the side camshaft, the valve lift can be adjusted by suitable 
design, for a given cam lift. This means that in case of overhead 
camshaft, the cam size has to be relatively larger for the same 
valve lift, which leads to higher cam-to-follower velocities and 
relative rubbing velocities resulting in side-thrust reaction caused 
by the cam action. 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
31
Desmodromic 
 
A form of valve actuation that uses mechanical means to open & close the valves, thus eliminating 
valve springs & the resulting bounce at high speeds. They featured in the Mercedes racing cars of the 
mid-50’s but are now associated with Ducati road & racing motor cycles 
 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
32
Valve Production
The forgings for conventional poppet valves may be produced by several processes, including 
drop-forging, upsetting extruding, and electric gathering. In each case the stock used comes in rod or bar 
form. The extrusion process employs stock of a diameter approximately 70 per cent that of the finished 
valve head and forms the stem by forcing some of the material through a die while at a red heat. To 
prevent fracture during the shearing operation, the bars are first brought up to red heat either by induction 
or in an open furnace. Burrs on the slugs are removed by tumbling. 
 
The average valve forging is completed in one heating on a 500- ton or 750-ton press operating at 
about 45 rpm. Valve slugs are placed in a hopper which feeds them into an induction-heating coil. The 
rate of feed can be varied by the operator from 8 to 20 slugs per minute, by means of a variable-speed 
motor drive. The average automotive valve requires a 1-in. slug, and of these slugs 16 are heated to about 
2000 F per minute, the power consumption amounting to 50kw. 
 
After the Forging Process, next process is Annealing.
Most exhaust-valve and all intake-valve forgings are annealed to relieve forging stresses. The 
treatment varies with the material, annealing temperatures ranging from 1200 F to 1800 F, and annealing 
periods from one hour to six hours. The process usually is carried on in a chain-type conveyor furnace, a 
dual control system permitting of changing the temperature during the annealing cycle. Another operation 
in the heat-treating department consists in grit-blasting the forgings in a tumble blast unit, to remove scale 
formed in the forging operation and to improve the appearance of the forgings. 
 
The next process in valve production is Machining and Grinding Operations 
Machining and grinding operations are performed on machine tools set up to make possible 
progressive line production. After passing through this line and having been subjected to the final 
inspection, the valves go directly to the shipping room for oiling and packing. The lay-out of the line for 
a particular valve depends on such factors as size, type, material, and quantity. 
 
All automotive valves have the following operations carried out on them: Roll straightening 
of stem and head, inspection for straightness, center-less rough-grinding of stem, hardening tip, 
finish grinding stem, finish grinding seat, inspection 
 
The valve forging is straightened on a machine of the Waterbury- Farrell thread-roller type, the 
valves are heated to 1425 F in a Surface Combustion chain-type furnace, which is loaded through a 
hopper and discharges into a chute feeding the straightening machine. The center-less grinders used to 
grind the stems are pro vided with an infeed attachment which causes the valves to drop into position 
between the wheels, and with a "kicker" which removes the valves at the end of the grinding cycle. All 
valves are forged with a flash on the periphery of the head. Most automotive valves are "forge-finished" 
on top and under the head, but the heads must be finished on the outside diameter and on the seat. That 
operation, which is usually performed on multiple-spindle automatics with carbide tools is followed by 
machining of the tip of the valve stem and of the ,keeper groove chamfering of the tip, and facing the 
valve to length. 
 
Heat Treatment 
Valves made of XCR and chrome-manganese. steel usually are age-hardened after the semi-finish 
machining operation, and many intake valves of SAE 3140 steel also are hardened in the semi-finish 
stage. If the valve is to be heat-treated, semi finish grinding of the stem follows the heat treatment; 
otherwise it precedes machining of the retainer groove. Heat-treated valves usually are grit-blasted to 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
33
remove surface scale, and then are hand straightened before any grinding is done on them. The semi-
finish grind is performed on a Cincinnati centerless grinder. 
 
Hardening and Grinding of Tip 
 
Tips of high-production valves usually are hardened by induction heat, those of others by the 
conventional flame-hardening process. A 20-kw high-frequency generator supplies the current for 
induction hardening. Induction hardening permits much better control of the hardness than flame 
hardening. It is usually specified that tips shall be ground to 15 RMS surface finish, and square with the 
valve stem to within 0.0015 in.. Large-production valves have the tip ground on automatic grinder 
equipped with a rotating fixture in which the valves are located from the seat face.  
 
Grinding of the seat is the last operation on the valve, and usually is done on a hydraulic grinder. 
The total indicator reading of seat runout to stem can be held to less than 0.001 in. in large-volume 
production. For this operation most valves are located from the tip end. 
 
Inspection 
All valves are visually inspected for surface defects, possible operations missed, etc., at 'the end of 
the line. Scleroscope and Rockwell machines are used to check the hardness. Stellited and welded valves 
are inspected 100 per cent. Magnaflux inspection is made to discover seams, subsurface stringers, and 
other defects difficult to recognize with the naked eye. Standard gauges are used throughout the line, 
masters being provided to check the dimensions from seat to tip, from seat to groove, and from groove to 
tip, and determinations are made of the runout of the tip and the seat relative to the stem. The machined 
retainer grooves are checked for form, radii, etc., in Comparators with a magnification of 25 to 1.
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
34
SLEEVE VALVES
As the term indicates, sleeve valves are cylindrical in 
shape. They surround the piston and actually form the working 
cylinder. There are two types of sleeves valves, viz., the single 
sleeve and the double sleeve types. 
A single sleeve valve is shown in Fig.. The sleeves are 
made of steel. 
The advantages of sleeves are: 
I. Simplicity of construction. 
2. Silent in operation, because there are no valve cams, tappets, 
valves, etc. which make noise. 
3. A longer period of running before decarbonization becomes 
necessary (50,000 km as compared to about 10,000 km for 
poppet valves). 
4. Reduced tendency to denote, because there are no hot spots, 
path of flame travel is short and combustion chamber is of 
symmetrical shape. 
5. Higher thermal efficiency is attained. 
 
However there are certain disadvantages also because 
of which it has become obsolete: 
I. High oil consumption, because larger area of sleeve surface 
has to be lubricated. 
2. Gumming. 
 
ROTARY VALVES
Many types of rotary valves have been developed. Fig. 
shows a disc type rotary valve. It consists of a rotating disc, 
which has a port. While rotating, it communicates alternately 
with inlet and exhaust manifolds. The main advantage of rotary 
valves is their uniform and noise- free motion. However, there 
are many difficulties in pressure sealing. Economical valve 
lubrication is another problem. 
 
References
•
High speed Combustion Engines-P M Heldt 
•
Automobile Engineering-Dr. Kirpal Singh 
•
Machine Design-Abdulla sheriff 
•
Theory & Practice in I C Engines-C F Taylor 
•
Autocar India Illustrated Automotive Glossary 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
35
VALVE DESIGN 
•
Material -For valve 
-Nickel steel for inlet valves; & High nickel chromium steel for exhaust valves (due 
to high temp. and corrosive action) 
For valve seat-Cast iron or bronze – Replaceable, (Cast iron-for big engines – due to economic reasons.) 
 
•
Size of valve ports 
Vg×a=Ap×Cp ave. 
Where Vg=velocity of gas 
≈2300 to 3300m/min-for stationary/marine engines 
 
≈3300 to 5000m/min-for automobile engines 
a=port area=
4
2
port
d
π
;
Ap=area of piston=
4
2
D
π
;
Cp ave= average piston velocity=2LNm/min 
*Fix vel. of gas, calculate port area & port diameter 
(
)
β
α
η
+
+
×
=
180
520
180
7.
14
'
P
T
V
V
ch
g
g
Where Vg=gas velocity – fixed – in ft/min 
 
(180+α+β) =duration of valve opening 
 
T=temp. in Rankine - ToF=1.8ToC+32, and T(R)= ToF+459.67 
 
Intake temp.≈20oC = 68oF = 528Rankine; 
 
Exhaust temp.≈300oC=1032Rankine 
ch
η
=charging efficiency for NA Engine≈85%; and 
SC Engine≈95 to 100% 
P=pr. of gas in psi 
=14.7psi - for intake=1atm. 
 
=29psi to 35psi – for exhaust=2 to 4atm. 
Inlet valve 
-α=opening advance – generally = 10o,
& β=closing delay – generally = 20 to 30o
Exhaust valve
-α= opening advance – generally – 40 to 50o,
& β=closing delay – generally – 10 to 20o
Hence calculate 
'
g
V
-For stationary engines≤12000ft/min – for intake valve &≤18000ft/min – for exhaust valve
 
-For automobile engines ≤18000ft/min – for intake valve &≤27000ft/min – for exhaust valve 
 
•
d1=dport=port diameter=
valve
gasthrough
velocityof
d
pistonspee
D
mean
)
(
•
fix αv=valve face angle=30o or 45o
•
valve lift h 
Angular area of opening 
4
cos
2
1
1
d
h
d
v
π
α
π
=
=port area 
or 
α
cos
25
.0
1
d
h =
But this gives hammering effect 
 
 
(h=0.1d1 to 0.2d1)
Therefore empirical relation 
h=0.2d1
may be adopted 
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
36
•
Thickness of valve disc = 
S
P
d
k
t
1
1
=
Where k1=0.54-for cast iron; 
0.42-for carbon steel & high grade steel 
 
S =4000psi-forcast iron; 8000psi-forcarbon steel & 
 
15000psi-for high grade steel 
 
P =max. gas pressure;  
d1=dport=port diameter 
[Or
σ
max
1
5.0
P
d
t =
, where, σ =allowable stress=420ksc for carbon steel & 700 to 800ksc for high grade steel] 
 
•
)]
90
sin(
[2
1
2
v
t
d
d
α
−
×
+
=
or=d1+2b 
0.7854(
)
2
1
2
2
2
3
7854
.0
d
d
d
≥
−
•
d3= (
)
2
2
2
1
d
d +
•
b=0.5(d2-d1) = 0.5d1






−
−
1
max
P
S
S
b
b
,
Where Sb=safe bearing pressure=4000psi for cast iron 
b=0.05d1 to 0.07d1
an empirical formula 
or b=
α
tan
t
=0.1d1+4mm 
 
•
do=diameter of valve stem = 
inch
d
16
3
18
1 +
bearing pressure = 
1
1
2
2
)
(
d
d
d
load
a
bearingare
load
×
×
−
=
π
Valve & valve mechanism 
B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S C E, Mandya 
 
 
37
(
)
(
)
62.27mm
50.96
35.8
d
d
d
area
opening
head
valve
of
Diameter
8.5mm
4mm
8
35.8
4mm
8
d
d
stem
valve
of
Diameter
7.58mm)
b
(assuming,
7.58
2
35.8
2b
d
d
head
Valve
of
Diamter
7.58mm
4mm
35.8
0.1
4mm
0.1d
b
Also,
10.74mm
tan30
6.2
tanα
t
b
seating
of
Width
And
6.2mm
42
5
35.8
0.5
σ
p
d
0.5
t
head
valve
of
Thickness
h
Lift
Valve
Max.
35.8mm
1500
300
80
V
S
D
d
diameter
Port
DN
DNm/min
300m/min
S
,
30
42N/mm
1500m/min,
V
80mm,
D
,
5N/mm
P
Given,
Solution;
,
30
Angle
Seat
 
Valve
42N/mm
Stress
 
Allowable
300m/min,
Speed
 
Piston
 
Mean
1500m/min,
 Velocity
Gas
80mm,
Diameter
 
Bore
 
Cylinder
,
5N/mm
Pressure
 
Gas
 
Max.
data;
 
following
 
the
 
from
 
engine
 
an
of
dimensions
 
valve
 
&
lift
 
valve
 
the
 
Determine
1
-
Example
2
2
2
2
2
1
3
1
0
1
2
1
max
1
1
0
2
2
max
0
2
2
=
+
=
+
=
=
=
+
=
+
=
=
=
=
×
+
=
+
=
=
∴
=
+
×
=
+
=
=
=
=
=
=
×
=
×
=
=
=
×
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
mm
mm
d
m
96
.
50
33
.
10
30
cos
4
8.
35
cos
4
sec
/
60
,
,
1
α
π
π
α
σ
