THEORY AND DESIGN OF AUTOMOTIVE ENGINES 
THEORY AND DESIGN
OF
AUTOMOTIVE ENGINES
Syllabus 
 
I Introduction 
1 General - Historical development of automobiles, Types of power plant, Principle of engine operation, 
Classification of engines. 
2. Two stroke & four stroke engines; Principles of engine operation (SI & CI), Scavenging - systems, 
theoretical processes, parameters, relative merits & demerits; Port timing diagrams, port design. 
Relative merits & demerits compared to petrol & diesel engines, scavenging pumps. 
 
II Engine components – 
Classification/types, function, materials, construction details, design and manufacturing processes of 
the following engine components 
3. Cylinders and liners - design, cylinder wear and corrosion, details of water jacket, dry and wet liners, 
Cylinder head - design; 
4. Piston, piston rings, piston pin - design - stress analysis, methods of manufacture, compensation of 
thermal expansion in pistons, heat treatment, piston ring selection, limits of fit for pins  
5. Connecting rod - design, effects of whipping, bearing materials, lubrication 
6. Crank shaft - design, firing order, balancing and torsional vibration analysis, vibration dampers, 
bearings,. Lubrication 
7. Flywheel - design; Camshaft - drives of cams, materials, Types (only descriptive) 
8. Valve and valve mechanism - design, types of valve operating mechanisms, valve springs, guides, 
push rods, rocker arms, tappets, valve timing diagrams  
9. Crank Case- Design of crank case, oil sumps and cooling features 
10. Manifolds-construction and design of inlet and exhaust manifolds. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
I. High Speed Engines - P .M.Heldt, Oxford & IBH , 1965 
2. Auto Design - R.B Gupta, Satya Prakashan, New Delhi 1999 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
I.A course in I.c. Engine - Mathur & Sharma, Dhanput Rai & Sons, Delhi, 1994 
2.Automobile Engineering VoU & II - Kirpal Singh, Standard publications, New Delhi, 1972 
3. Modem Petrol Engine ~ A.W.Judge, B.I. Publications. 1983 
4. I.c. Engine - Maleev &Litchy, McGrawHill 
5. I.C.Engines - H.B.Keshwani, Standard Pub New Delhi., 1982 
6. Fundamentals of I.C.Engines - J.B.Heywood 
7. Machine design exercises - S.N.Trikha, Khanna publications, Delhi 
8. Automotive mechanics - N.K.Giri, Khanna publications,Delhi 
9. Automotive mechanics - William H. Crouse, Tata Mc,Graw Hill Publications Co. New Delhi 
10. I.C.Engines and Air Pollution - B.P.Obel'rlntext harper & Roni Pub, New york 
) 
 
Scheme of Examination (AU511)
Answer any FIVE questions out of EIGHT questions. 
 
Chapter No. 
1 &2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8, 9&10
Question 
2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
1
CHAPTER - 1 
HISTORY 
Automobiles through the Years - Since they originated in the late 1800s, automobiles have 
changed and developed in response to consumer wishes, economic conditions, and advancing 
technology. The first gas-powered vehicles looked like horse buggies with engines mounted underneath 
because this was the style to which people were accustomed. By 1910, however, features like the front-
mounted engine were already established, giving the automobile a look that was all its own. As public 
demand for cars increased, the vehicles became more stylized. The classic cars of the 1920s and 1930s 
epitomize the sleek, individually designed luxury cars called the “classic cars.” During the 1940s and 
1950s, automobiles generally became larger until the advent of the “compact” car, which immediately 
became a popular alternative. The gasoline crisis is reflected in the fuel efficient cars made in the 1970s 
and 1980s. Current designs continue to reflect economy awareness, although many different markets 
exist.  
 
The history of the automobile actually began about 4,000 years ago when the first wheel was 
used for transportation in India. 
In the early 15th century the Portuguese arrived in China and the interaction of the two cultures 
led to a variety of new technologies, including the creation of a wheel that turned under its own power. 
By the 1600s small steam-powered engine models had been developed, but it was another century 
before a full-sized engine-powered vehicle was created. 
In 1769 French Army officer Captain Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot built what has been called the first 
automobile. Cugnot’s three-wheeled, steam-powered vehicle carried four persons. Designed to move 
artillery pieces, it had a top speed of a little more than 3.2 km/h (2 mph) and had to stop every 20 
minutes to build up a fresh head of steam. 
Cugnot 
Steam 
Tractor  
-the 
first 
self-
propelled 
road 
vehicle, thus, the 
earliest automobile. 
Powered by steam, 
the three-wheeled 
tractor- invented in 
1769 by Nicolas-
Joseph 
Cugnot. 
designed to carry 
artillery, but similar 
vehicles 
soon 
found many other 
uses in industry. 
 
As early as 1801, successful but very heavy steam automobiles were introduced in England. 
Laws barred them from public roads and forced their owners to run them like trains on private tracks. 
In 1802 a steam-powered coach designed by British engineer Richard Trevithick journeyed more than 
160 km (100 mi) from Cornwall to London. Steam power caught the attention of other vehicle builders. 
In 1804 American inventor Oliver Evans built a steam-powered vehicle in Chicago, Illinois. French 
engineer Onésiphore Pecqueur built one in 1828. 
British inventor Walter Handcock built a series of steam carriages in the mid-1830s that were 
used for the first omnibus service in London. 
By the mid-1800s England had an extensive network of steam coach lines. Horse-drawn 
stagecoach companies and the new railroad companies pressured the British Parliament to approve 
heavy tolls on steam-powered road vehicles. The tolls quickly drove the steam coach operators out of 
business. 
During the early 20th century steam cars were popular in the United States. Most famous was 
the Stanley Steamer, built by American twin brothers Freelan and Francis Stanley. A Stanley Steamer 
established a world land speed record in 1906 of 205.44 km/h (121.573 mph). Manufacturers produced 
about 125 models of steam-powered automobiles, including the Stanley, until 1932.  
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
2
Internal-Combustion Engine  
Development of lighter steam cars during the 19th century coincided with major developments 
in engines that ran on gasoline or other fuels. Because the newer engines burned fuel in cylinders inside 
the engine, they were called internal-combustion engines. 
In 1860 French inventor Jean-Joseph-Étienne Lenoir patented a one-cylinder engine that used 
kerosene for fuel. Two years later, a vehicle powered by Lenoir’s engine reached a top speed of about 
6.4 km/h (about 4 mph). 
In 1864 Austrian inventor Siegfried Marcus built and drove a carriage propelled by a two-
cylinder gasoline engine.
American George Brayton patented an internal-combustion engine that was displayed at the 
1876 Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
In 1876 German engineer Nikolaus August Otto built a four-stroke gas engine, the most direct ancestor 
to today’s automobile engines. In a four-stroke engine the pistons move down to draw fuel vapor into 
the cylinder during stroke one; in stroke two, the pistons move up to compress the vapor; in stroke three 
the vapor explodes and the hot gases push the pistons down the cylinders; and in stroke four the pistons 
move up to push exhaust gases out of the cylinders. Engines with two or more cylinders are designed so 
combustion occurs in one cylinder after the other instead of in all at once. Two-stroke engines 
accomplish the same steps, but less efficiently and with more exhaust emissions. 
Automobile manufacturing began in earnest in Europe by the late 1880s. 
German engineer Gottlieb Daimler and German inventor Wilhelm Maybach mounted a gasoline-
powered engine onto a bicycle, creating a motorcycle, in 1885.
In 1887 they manufactured their first car, which included a steering tiller and a four-speed 
gearbox. Another German engineer, Karl Benz, produced his first gasoline car in 1886. 
 
Early Car 
The first practical car, built 
by German engineer Karl 
Benz in 1885, initiated the 
era 
of 
automobile 
manufacturing. Benz made 
improvements to the internal 
combustion 
engine 
and 
invented the differential drive 
and 
other 
automotive 
components. The company 
Benz founded grew into one 
of the largest automobile 
manufacturers in Germany. 
 
In 1890 Daimler and Maybach started a successful car manufacturing company, The Daimler 
Motor Company, which eventually merged with Benz’s manufacturing firm in 1926 to create Daimler-
Benz. The joint company makes cars today under the Mercedes-Benz nameplate. 
In France, a company called Panhard-Levassor began making cars in 1894 using Daimler’s 
patents. Instead of installing the engine under the seats, as other car designers had done, the company 
introduced the design of a front-mounted engine under the hood. Panhard-Levassor also introduced, a 
clutch and gears, and separate construction of the chassis, or underlying structure of the car, and the car 
body. The company’s first model was a gasoline-powered buggy steered by a tiller. 
French bicycle manufacturer Armand Peugeot saw the Panhard-Levassor car and designed an 
automobile using a similar Daimler engine. In 1891 this first Peugeot automobile paced a 1,046-km 
(650-mi) professional bicycle race between Paris and Brest. 
Other French automobile manufacturers opened shop in the late 1800s, including Renault. 
In Italy, Fiat (Fabbrica Italiana Automobili di Torino) began building cars in 1899. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
3
American automobile builders were not far behind. Brothers Charles Edgar Duryea and James 
Frank Duryea built several gas-powered vehicles between 1893 and 1895. The first Duryea, a one-
cylinder, four-horsepower model, looked much like a Panhard-Levassor model. 
 
Horseless Carriage 
The original horseless carriage was introduced in 
1893 by brothers Charles and Frank Duryea. It was 
America’s first internal-combustion motor car, and it 
was followed by Henry Ford’s first experimental car 
that same year. 
 
In 
1893 
American 
industrialist 
Henry Ford built an internal-combustion 
engine from plans he saw in a magazine. In 
1896 he used an engine to power a vehicle 
mounted on bicycle wheels and steered by a 
tiller.  
Early Electric Cars  
For a few decades in the 1800s, electric engines enjoyed great popularity because they were 
quiet and ran at slow speeds that were less likely to scare horses and people. By 1899 an electric car 
designed and driven by Belgian inventor Camille Jenatzy set a record of 105.8810 km/h (65.79 mph). 
Early electric cars featured a large bank of storage batteries under the hood. Heavy cables connected the 
batteries to a motor between the front and rear axles. Most electric cars had top speeds of 48 km/h (30 
mph), but could go only 80 km (50 mi) before their batteries needed recharging. Electric automobiles 
were manufactured in quantity in the United States until 1930. 
 
Automobiles in the 20th century  
For many years after the introduction of automobiles, three kinds of power sources were in 
common use: steam engines, gasoline engines, and electric motors.
In 1900 more than 2,300 automobiles were registered in New York City; Boston, Massachusetts; and 
Chicago, Illinois. Of these, 1,170 were steam cars, 800 were electric cars, and only 400 were gasoline 
cars. Gasoline-powered engines eventually became the nearly universal choice for automobiles because 
they allowed longer trips and faster speeds than engines powered by steam or electricity. 
Improvements in the operating and riding qualities of gasoline automobiles developed quickly 
after 1900. The 1902 Locomobile was the first American car with a four-cylinder, water-cooled, front-
mounted gasoline engine, very similar in design to most cars today. Built-in baggage compartments 
appeared in 1906, along with weather resistant tops and side curtains. An electric self-starter was 
introduced in 1911 to replace the hand crank used to start the engine turning. Electric headlights were 
introduced at about the same time.
Most automobiles at the turn of the 20th century appeared more or less like horseless carriages. 
In 1906 gasoline-powered cars were produced that had a style all their own. In these new models, a 
hood covered the front-mounted engine. Two kerosene or acetylene lamps mounted to the front served 
as headlights. Cars had fenders that covered the wheels and step-up platforms called running boards, 
which helped passengers, get in and out of the vehicle. The passenger compartment was behind the 
engine. Although drivers of horse-drawn vehicles usually sat on the right, automotive steering wheels 
were on the left in the United States.
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
4
In 1903 Henry Ford incorporated the Ford Motor Company, which introduced its first 
automobile, the Model A, in that same year. It closely resembled the 1903 Cadillac, which was hardly 
surprising since Ford had designed cars the previous year for the Cadillac Motor Car Company. Ford’s 
company rolled out new car models each year, and each model was named with a letter of the alphabet. 
By 1907, when models R and S appeared, Ford’s share of the domestic automobile market had soared to 
35 percent. 
 
Ford Model T 
A
Ford Model T 
rolls 
off 
the 
assembly 
line. 
Between 1908 and 
1927, Ford built 15 
million Model Ts. 
Ford’s famous Model T debuted in 1908 but was called a 1909 Ford. Ford built 17,771 Model 
T’s and offered nine body styles. Popularly known as the Tin Lizzy, the Model T became one of the 
biggest-selling automobiles of all time. Ford sold more than 15 million before stopping production of 
the model in 1927. The company’s innovative assembly-line method of building the cars was widely 
adopted in the automobile industry. 
 
Silver Ghost 
One of the highest-rated early 
luxury 
automobiles, 
the 
1909 
Rolls-Royce 
Silver 
Ghost’s 
features included a quiet 6-
cylinder engine, leather interior, 
folding windscreens and hood, 
and an aluminum body. Generally 
driven only by chauffeurs, the 
emphasis of the luxury car was on 
comfort and style rather than 
speed. 
 
By 1920 more than 8 million Americans owned cars. Major reasons for the surge in automobile 
ownership were Ford’s Model T, the assembly-line method of building it, and the affordability of cars 
for the ordinary wage earner. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
5
Improvements in engine-powered cars during the 1920s contributed to their popularity: 
synchromesh transmissions for easier gear shifting; four-wheel hydraulic brake systems; improved 
carburetors; shatterproof glass; balloon tires; heaters; and mechanically operated windshield wipers.
Phaeton 
Cars of the 1920s exhibited design refinements such as 
balloon tires, pressed-steel wheels, and four-wheel 
brakes. Although assembly lines (which originated with 
Henry Ford in 1908) continued to bring the price of 
automobiles down, many cars in this time were one-of-
a-kind 
vintage 
models, 
made 
to 
individual 
specifications. The 1929 Graham Paige DC Phaeton 
shown here featured an 8-cylinder engine and an 
aluminum body. 
 
From 1930 to 1937, automobile engines and bodies became large and luxurious. Many 12- and 
16-cylinder cars were built. Independent front suspension, which made the big cars more comfortable, 
appeared in 1933. Also introduced during the 1930s were stronger, more reliable braking systems, and 
higher-compression engines, which developed more horsepower. Mercedes introduced the world’s first
diesel car in 1936.
Automobiles on both sides of the Atlantic were styled with gracious proportions, long hoods, 
and pontoon-shaped fenders. Creative artistry merged with industrial design to produce appealing, 
aerodynamic automobiles. 
De Luxe Sedan 
The 
roomy 
interior 
and rear-hinged back 
door of this 1937 
Pontiac 
De 
Luxe 
sedan 
represent 
a 
move toward a car 
more suited to the 
needs 
of 
families. 
With 
these 
consumers in mind, 
cars were designed 
to 
be 
convenient, 
reliable, and relatively 
inexpensive. Vehicles 
in the 1930s were 
generally less boxy 
and more streamlined 
than 
their 
predecessors. 
 
Some of the first vehicles to fully incorporate the fender into the bodywork came along just after 
World War II, but the majority of designs still had separate fenders with pontoon shapes holding 
headlight assemblies. Three companies, Ford, Nash, and Hudson Motor Car Company, offered postwar 
designs that merged fenders into the bodywork. The 1949 Ford was a landmark in this respect, and its 
new styling was so well accepted the car continued in production virtually unchanged for three years, 
selling more than 3 million. During the 1940s, sealed-beam headlights, tubeless tires, and the automatic 
transmission were introduced.
Two schools of styling emerged in the 1950s, one on each side of the Atlantic. The Europeans 
continued to produce small, light cars weighing less than 1,300 kg (2,800 lb). European sports cars of 
that era featured hand-fashioned aluminum bodies over a steel chassis and framework. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
6
Studebaker 
This 1940 Studebaker Champion two-door sedan was 
designed by Raymond Loewy and built by Studebaker 
craftsmen. Features emerging in the 1940s include 
automatic transmission, sealed-beam headlights, and 
tubeless tires. 
 
In America, automobile designers borrowed features for their cars that were normally found on 
aircraft and ships, including tailfins and portholes. Automobiles were produced that had more space, 
more power, and smoother riding capability. Introduction of power steering and power brakes made 
bigger cars easier to handle. The Buick Motor Car Company, Olds Motor Vehicle Company 
(Oldsmobile), Cadillac Automobile Company, and Ford all built enormous cars, some weighing as 
much as 2,495 kg (5,500 lb). The first import by German manufacturer Volkswagen AG, advertised as 
the Beetle, arrived in the United States in 1949. Only two were sold that year, but American consumers 
soon began buying the Beetle and other small imports by the thousands. 
 
VW Beetle 
The Volkswagen Beetle dominated the 
market for several years, during which few 
modifications were made on the original 
design. Volkswagen’s name means “car for 
the people,” and the car served at least two 
important 
consumer 
needs. 
The 
rear-
mounted engine and small, rounded, buglike 
shape of the European car represented an 
appealing combination of look and economy 
that remained popular for more than four 
decades. 
 
That prompted a downsizing of some American-made vehicles. The first American car called a 
compact was the Nash Rambler. Introduced in 1950, it did not attract buyers on a large scale until 1958. 
More compacts, smaller in overall size than a standard car but with virtually the same interior body 
dimensions, emerged from the factories of many major manufacturers. The first Japanese imports, 16 
compact trucks, arrived in the United States in 1956. 
In the 1950s new automotive features were introduced, including air conditioning and 
electrically operated car windows and seat adjusters. Manufacturers changed from the 6-volt to the 12-
volt ignition system, which gave better engine performance and more reliable operation of the growing 
number of electrical accessories. 
By 1960 sales of foreign and domestic compacts accounted for about one-third of all passenger 
cars sold in the United States. American cars were built smaller, but with increased engine size and 
horsepower. Heating and ventilating systems became standard equipment on even the least expensive 
models. Automatic transmissions, power brakes, and power steering became widespread. Styling 
sometimes prevailed over practicality—some cars were built in which the engines had to be lifted to 
allow simple service operations, like changing the spark plugs. Back seats were designed with no 
legroom. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
7
Gullwing 
 
Powerful 
high-performance 
cars 
such as this 1957 Mercedes-Benz 
300SL were built on compact and 
stylized lines. 
Also called 
the 
Gullwing because its doors open 
upward into the shape of a gull’s 
wings, the 300SL was capable of 
230 kmh (144 mph), its on-road 
performance matching its racing 
capacity. 
 
El Dorado  
This 
1957 
Cadillac 
El 
Dorado 
convertible epitomizes the large cars of 
the “American Dream” era. Tail fins are 
an example of a trend in car design. 
Although the feature did little for the 
performance of the vehicle, consumers 
loved the look, and demanded fins of 
increasing size until the 1960s. 
 
Mustang 
More 
than 
100,000 
Ford 
Mustangs sold during first four 
months the model was on the 
market in 1964, making it Ford’s 
best early sales success since 
the introduction of the Model T. A 
vehicle from the “muscle car” 
category, the Mustang’s popular 
characteristics included a small, 
fast design, excellent handling, a 
powerful engine, and a distinctive 
look. 
 
In the 1970s American manufacturers continued to offer smaller, lighter models in addition to 
the bigger sedans that led their product lines, but Japanese and European compacts continued to sell 
well. Catalytic converters were introduced to help reduce exhaust emissions.
Digital speedometers and electronic prompts to service parts of the vehicle appeared in the 
1980s. Japanese manufacturers opened plants in the United States. At the same time, sporty cars and 
family minivans surged in popularity. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
8
Advances in automobile technology in the 1980s included better engine control and the use of 
innovative types of fuel. In 1981 Bayerische Motoren Werke AG (BMW) introduced an on-board 
computer to monitor engine performance. A solar-powered vehicle, SunRaycer, traveled 3,000 km 
(1,864 mi) in Australia in six days.
MR-2 Turbo 
Modern 
cars 
like 
the 
Japanese 1992 MR-2 Turbo 
T-bar Toyota are generally 
light, 
aerodynamically 
shaped, 
and 
compact. 
Japanese imports changed 
the 
automobile 
industry 
significantly. The generally 
reliable, 
inexpensive 
cars 
increased 
competition 
between 
manufacturers 
dramatically, to the benefit of 
consumers. 
 
New technologies 
Gas-Electric Hybrids 
 
The Toyota Prius,
a four-seat hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), was the first 
HEV to be marketed when Toyota introduced it in Japan 
in 1997.  
 
The Honda Insight,
a two-seat HEV, followed in 1999 when it was sold in 
both Japan and the United States. The Prius had its U.S. 
debut in 2000. 
 
Gas-Electric Hybrids The Toyota Prius, a four-seat hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), was the first 
HEV to be marketed when Toyota introduced it in Japan in 1997. The Honda Insight, a two-seat HEV, 
followed in 1999 when it was sold in both Japan and the United States. The Prius had its U.S. debut in 
2000.  
Pollution-control laws adopted at the beginning of the 1990s in some of the United States and in 
Europe called for automobiles that produced better gas mileage with lower emissions. In 1996 General 
Motors became the first to begin selling an all-electric car, the EV1, to California buyers. The all-
electric cars introduced so far have been limited by low range, long recharges, and weak consumer 
interest.  
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
9
Engines that run on hydrogen have been tested. Hydrogen combustion produces only a trace of 
harmful emissions, no carbon dioxide, and a water-vapor by-product. However, technical problems 
related to the gas’s density and flammability remains to be solved. 
Diesel engines burn fuel more efficiently, and produce fewer pollutants, but they are noisy. 
Popular in trucks and heavy vehicles, diesel engines are only a small portion of the automobile market. 
A redesigned, quieter diesel engine introduced by Volkswagen in 1996 may pave the way for more 
diesels, and less pollution, in passenger cars. 
While some developers searched for additional alternatives, others investigated ways to combine 
electricity with liquid fuels to produce low-emissions power systems. Two automobiles with such 
hybrid engines, the Toyota Prius and the Honda Insight, became available in the late 1990s. Prius hit 
automobile showrooms in Japan in 1997, selling 30,000 models in its first two years of production. The 
Prius became available for sale in North America in 2000. The Honda Insight debuted in North America 
in late 1999. Both vehicles, known as hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), promised to double the fuel 
efficiency of conventional gasoline-powered cars while significantly reducing toxic emissions. 
Computer control of automobile systems increased dramatically during the 1990s. The central 
processing unit (CPU) in modern engines manages overall engine performance. Microprocessors 
regulating other systems share data with the CPU. Computers manage fuel and air mixture ratios, 
ignition timing, and exhaust-emission levels. They adjust the antilock braking and traction control 
systems. In many models, computers also control the air conditioning and heating, the sound system, 
and the information displayed in the vehicle’s dashboard. 
Expanded use of computer technology, development of stronger and lighter materials, and 
research on pollution control will produce better, “smarter” automobiles.
In the 1980s the notion that a car would “talk” to its driver was science fiction; by the 1990s it 
had become reality.
Onboard navigation was one of the new automotive technologies in the 1990s. By using the 
satellite-aided global positioning system (GPS), a computer in the automobile can pinpoint the vehicle’s 
location within a few meters. The onboard navigation system uses an electronic compass, digitized 
maps, and a display screen showing where the vehicle is relative to the destination the driver wants to 
reach. After being told the destination, the computer locates it and directs the driver to it, offering 
alternative routes if needed. 
Some cars now come equipped with GPS locator beacons, enabling a GPS system operator to 
locate the vehicle, map its location, and if necessary, direct repair or emergency workers to the scene.
Cars equipped with computers and cellular telephones can link to the Internet to obtain constantly 
updated traffic reports, weather information, route directions, and other data. Future built-in computer 
systems may be used to automatically obtain business information over the Internet and manage 
personal affairs while the vehicle’s owner is driving.
During the 1980s and 1990s, manufacturers trimmed 450 kg (1,000 lb) from the weight of the 
typical car by making cars smaller. Less weight, coupled with more efficient engines, doubled the gas 
mileage obtained by the average new car between 1974 and 1995. Further reductions in vehicle size are 
not practical, so the emphasis has shifted to using lighter materials, such as plastics, aluminum alloys, 
and carbon composites, in the engine and the rest of the vehicle. 
Looking ahead, engineers are devising ways to reduce driver errors and poor driving habits.
Systems already exist in some locales to prevent intoxicated drivers from starting their vehicles. The
technology may be expanded to new vehicles. Anti-collision systems with sensors and warning signals
are being developed. In some, the car’s brakes automatically slow the vehicle if it is following another
vehicle too closely. New infrared sensors or radar systems may warn drivers when another vehicle is in
their “blind spot.” 
Catalytic converters work only when they are warm, so most of the pollution they emit occurs in 
the first few minutes of operation. Engineers are working on ways to keep the converters warm for 
longer periods between drives, or heat the converters more rapidly. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
10
Types of power plant  
An engine is a device which transforms one form of energy into another form. However, while 
transforming energy from one form to another, the efficiency of conversion plays an important role. 
Normally, most of the engines convert thermal energy into mechanical work and therefore they are 
called 'heat engines'. 
Heat engine is a device which transforms the chemical energy of a fuel into thermal energy and 
utilizes this thermal energy to perform useful work. Thus, thermal energy is converted to mechanical 
energy in a heat engine. 
Heat engines can be broadly classified into two categories: 
(i) Internal Combustion Engines (IC Engines) 
(ii) External Combustion Engines (EC Engines)  
 
Table 1.1 Classification of heat engines 
 
Engines whether Internal Combustion or External Combustion are of two types, viz., 
(i) Rotary engines 
(ii) Reciprocating engines 
Of the various types of heat engines, the most widely used ones are the reciprocating internal 
combustion engine, the gas turbine and the steam turbine. The steam engine is rarely used nowadays. 
The reciprocating internal combustion engine enjoys some advantages over the steam turbine due to the 
absence of heat exchangers in the passage of the working fluid (boilers and condensers in steam turbine 
plant). This results in a considerable mechanical simplicity and improved power plant efficiency of the 
internal combustion engine. 
 
Fig.1.1 
Classification of heat engines 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
11
Another advantage of the reciprocating internal combustion engine over the other two types is 
that all its components work at an average temperature which is much below the maximum temperature 
of the working fluid in the cycle. This is because the high temperature of the working fluid in the cycle 
persists only for a very small fraction of the cycle time. Therefore, very high working fluid temperatures 
can be employed resulting in higher thermal efficiency.  
Further, in internal combustion engines, higher thermal efficiency can be obtained with 
moderate maximum working pressure of the fluid in the cycle, and therefore, the weight of power ratio 
is less than that of the steam turbine plant. Also, it has been possible to develop reciprocating internal 
combustion engines of very small power output (power output of even a fraction of a kilowatt) with 
reasonable thermal efficiency and cost. 
The main disadvantage of this type of engine is the problem of vibration caused by the 
reciprocating components. Also, it is not possible to use a variety of fuels in these engines. Only liquid 
or gaseous fuels of given specification can be efficiently used. These fuels are relatively more 
expensive. 
Considering all the above factors the reciprocating internal combustion engines have been found 
suitable for use in automobiles, motor-cycles and scooters, power boats, ships, slow speed aircraft, 
locomotives and power units of relatively small output. 
External Combustion and Internal Combustion Engines 
External combustion engines are those in which combustion takes place outside the engine 
whereas in internal combustion engines combustion takes place within the engine. For example, in a 
steam engine or a steam turbine, the heat generated due to the combustion of fuel is employed to 
generate high pressure steam which is used as the working fluid in a reciprocating engine or a turbine. 
In case of gasoline or diesel engines, the products of combustion generated by the combustion of fuel 
and air within the cylinder form the working fluid. 
 
Principle of engine operation (4 stroke & 2 stroke operating cycles) 
In reciprocating engines, the piston moves back and forth 
in a cylinder and transmits power through a connecting rod and 
crank mechanism to the drive shaft as shown in Fig1.2. The steady 
rotation of the crank produces a cyclical piston motion. The piston 
comes to rest at the top center (TC) crank position and bottom-
center (BC) [These crank positions are also referred to as top-
dead-center (TDC) and bottom-dead-center (BDC)] crank position 
when the cylinder volume is a minimum or maximum, 
respectively. The minimum cylinder volume is called the 
clearance volume.  
The volume swept out by the piston, the difference 
between the maximum or total volume Vt and the clearance 
volume, is called the displaced or swept volume Vd. The ratio of 
maximum volume to minimum volume is the compression ratio rc.
Typical values of rc are 8 to 12 for SI engines and 12 to 24 for CI 
engines. 
 
Fig 1.2 
Basic geometry of the reciprocating internal combustion engine.
Vc, Vd, and Vt, indicate clearance, displaced, and total cylinder volumes. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
12
Fig.1.3 :-The four-stroke operating cycle. 
 
The majority of reciprocating engines operate on what is known as the four-stroke cycle. Each 
cylinder requires four strokes of its piston-two revolutions of the crankshaft-to complete the sequence of 
events which produces one power stroke. Both SI and CI engines use this cycle which comprises  
1. An intake stroke, which starts with the piston at TC and ends with the piston at BC, which draws 
fresh mixture into the cylinder. To increase the mass inducted, the inlet valve opens shortly before the 
stroke starts and closes after it ends. 
2. A compression stroke, when both valves are closed and the mixture inside the cylinder is compressed 
to a small fraction of its initial volume. Toward the end of the compression stroke, combustion is 
initiated and the cylinder pressure rises more rapidly. 
3. A power stroke, or expansion stroke, which starts with the piston at TC and ends at BC as the high-
temperature, high-pressure, gases push the piston down and force the crank to rotate. About five times 
as much work is done on the piston during the power stroke as the piston had to do during compression. 
As the piston approaches BC the exhaust valve opens to initiate the exhaust process and drop the 
cylinder pressure to close to the exhaust pressure. 
4 An exhaust stroke, where the remaining burned gases exit the cylinder: first, because the cylinder 
pressure may be substantially higher than the exhaust pressure; then as they are swept out by the piston 
as it moves toward TC. As the piston approaches TC the inlet valve opens. Just after TC the exhaust 
valve closes and the cycle starts again. 
Though often called the Otto cycle after its inventor, Nicolaus Otto, who built the first engine 
operating on these principles in 1876, the more descriptive four-stroke nomenclature is preferred. 
The four-stroke cycle requires, for each engine cylinder, two crankshaft revolutions for each 
power stroke. 
To obtain a higher power output from a given engine size, and a simpler valve design, the two-
stroke cycle was developed. The two-stroke cycle is applicable to both SI and CI engines. 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
13
Figure 1.4 shows one of the simplest types of two-stroke engine designs. Ports in the cylinder 
liner opened and closed by the piston motion, control the exhaust and inlet flows while the piston is 
close to BC. The two strokes are: 
A compression stroke, which starts by closing the inlet and exhaust ports, and then compresses 
the cylinder contents and draws fresh charge into the crankcase. As the piston approaches TC, 
combustion is initiated. 
 
Fig.1.4 The two-stroke operating cycle. 
 A crankcase-scavenged engine  
 
A power or expansion stroke, similar to that in the four-stroke cycle until the piston approaches 
BC, when first the exhaust ports and then the intake ports are uncovered. Most of the burnt gases exit 
the cylinder in an exhaust blow down process. When the inlet ports are uncovered, the fresh charge 
which has been compressed in the crankcase flows into the cylinder. 
The piston and the ports are generally shaped to deflect the incoming charge from flowing directly into 
the exhaust ports and to achieve effective scavenging of the residual gases. 
 
Each engine cycle with one power stroke is completed in one crankshaft revolution. However, it 
is difficult to fill completely the displaced volume with fresh charge, and some of the fresh mixture 
flows directly out of the cylinder during the scavenging process. The example shown is a cross-
scavenged design; other approaches use loop-scavenging or uniflow systems 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
14
Engine classifications 
 
Fig.1.5 
IC engine classification 
 
There are many different types of internal combustion engines. They can be classified by: 
 
1. Application. 
Automobile, truck, locomotive, light aircraft, marine, portable power system, power generation 
 
2 Basic engine design 
 
Reciprocating 
engines (in turn subdivided 
by arrangement of cylinders:
e.g., 
in-line, 
V, 
radial, 
opposed-ref, fig1.6.), rotary 
engines (Wankel and other 
geometries) 
Fig1.6.Engine 
Classification by 
Cylinder 
Arrangements 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
15
(C) 
3. Working cycle. 
Four-stroke cycle: naturally aspirated (admitting atmospheric air), supercharged (admitting pre-
compressed fresh mixture), and turbocharged (admitting fresh mixture compressed in a compressor 
driven by an exhaust turbine), 
Two-stroke cycle: crankcase scavenged, supercharged, and turbocharged, 
Constant volume heat addition cycle engine or Otto cycle engine -SI engine or Gasoline engine, 
Constant pressure heat addition cycle engine or Diesel cycle engine-CI engine or Diesel engine. 
 
4 Valve or port design and location.  
Overhead (or I-head) valves, under head 
(or L-head) valves, rotary valves, cross-
scavenged porting (inlet and exhaust ports on 
opposite sides of cylinder at one end), loop-
scavenged porting (inlet and exhaust ports on 
same side of cylinder at one end), through- or 
uni-flow scavenged (inlet and exhaust ports or 
valves at different ends of cylinder) 
 
Fig1.7 
classification of SI engine 
by port/ valve location 
 
(a)Cross, 
(b) Loop, 
(c) Uniflow Scavenging  
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
16
5. Fuel 
Gasoline (or petrol), fuel oil (or diesel fuel), natural gas, liquid petroleum gas, alcohols 
(methanol, ethanol), hydrogen, dual fuel 
 
6. Method of mixture preparation. 
Carburetion, fuel injection into the intake ports or intake manifold, fuel injection into the engine 
cylinder 
 
7. Method of ignition 
 
Spark ignition (in conventional engines where the mixture is uniform and in stratified-charge 
engines where the mixture is non-uniform), compression ignition (in conventional diesels, as well as 
ignition in gas engines by pilot injection of fuel oil) 
 
8. Combustion chamber design.
Open chamber (many designs: e.g., disc, wedge, hemisphere, bowl-in-piston), divided chamber 
(small and large auxiliary chambers; many designs: e.g., swirl chambers, pre-chambers) 
 
9. Method of load control. 
Throttling of fuel and air flow together so mixture composition is essentially unchanged, control 
of fuel flow alone, a combination of these 
 
10. Method of cooling. 
Water cooled, air cooled, un-cooled (other than by natural convection and radiation) 
 
.
All these distinctions are important and they illustrate the breadth of engine designs available 
from a fundamental point of view. The method of ignition has been selected as the primary classifying 
feature. From the method of ignition-spark-ignition or compression-ignition-follow the important 
characteristics of the fuel used, method of mixture preparation, combustion chamber design, method of 
load control, details of the combustion process, engine emissions, and operating characteristics. Some of 
the other classifications are used as subcategories within this basic classification. The engine operating 
cycle--four-stroke or two-stroke--is next in importance. 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
17
Table 1.2 
 
Theory and Design of Automotive Engines 
By B Dinesh Prabhu, Assistant Professor, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, KARNATAKA 
18
Table 1.3 Engine characteristics Emphasized by Type of Service 
 
References: 
1. Microsoft Encarta 
2. Fundamentals of IC Engines By J B Heywood 
3. Theory & Practice in IC Engines By C F Taylor 
4. I C Engines By M L Mathur & RP Sharma 
5. I C Engines By Ganesan 
